Main menu
WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Contents hide
(Top)
Early life
Early career
Menlo Park laboratory (1876–1886)
Toggle Menlo Park laboratory (1876–1886) subsection
West Orange and Fort Myers (1886–1931)
Other inventions and projects
Toggle Other inventions and projects subsection
Final years
Toggle Final years subsection
Marriages and children
Views
Toggle Views subsection
Awards
Toggle Awards subsection
People who worked for Edison
See also
References
Bibliography
External links
Thomas Edison
Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history
Tools
Appearance hide
Text
Small
Standard
Large
Width
Standard
Wide
Color (beta)
Automatic
Light
Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Edison" redirects here. For other uses, see Edison (disambiguation).
Thomas Edison
Edison c. 1922
Born	Thomas Alva Edison
February 11, 1847
Milan, Ohio, U.S.
Died	October 18, 1931 (aged 84)
West Orange, New Jersey, U.S.
Burial place	Thomas Edison National Historical Park
Education	Self-educated; some coursework at Cooper Union
Occupations
Inventorbusinessman
Years active	1877–1930
Known for
See list
Spouses
Mary Stilwell
​(m. 1871; died 1884)​
Mina Miller ​(m. 1886)​
Children	6, including Madeleine, Charles, and Theodore
Relatives	Lewis Miller (father-in-law)
Awards
See list
Thomas Edison’s Voice
Duration: 16 seconds.0:16
Edison reciting Mary Had a Little Lamb
Recorded 1929
Signature
Thomas Alva Edison (February 11, 1847 – October 18, 1931) was an American inventor and businessman.[1][2][3] He developed many devices in fields such as electric power generation, mass communication, sound recording, and motion pictures.[4] These inventions, which include the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and early versions of the electric light bulb, have had a widespread impact on the modern industrialized world.[5] He was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of organized science and teamwork to the process of invention, working with many researchers and employees. He established the first industrial research laboratory.[6]
Edison was raised in the American Midwest. Early in his career he worked as a telegraph operator, which inspired some of his earliest inventions.[4] In 1876, he established his first laboratory facility in Menlo Park, New Jersey, where many of his early inventions were developed. He later established a botanical laboratory in Fort Myers, Florida, in collaboration with businessmen Henry Ford and Harvey S. Firestone, and a laboratory in West Orange, New Jersey, that featured the world's first film studio, the Black Maria. With 1,093 US patents in his name, as well as patents in other countries, Edison is regarded as the most prolific inventor in American history.[7] Edison married twice and fathered six children. He died in 1931 due to complications from diabetes.
Early life
Edison in 1861
Thomas Edison was born in 1847 in Milan, Ohio, but grew up in Port Huron, Michigan, after the family moved there in 1854.[8] He was the seventh and last child of Samuel Ogden Edison Jr. (1804–1896, born in Marshalltown, Nova Scotia) and Nancy Matthews Elliott (1810–1871, born in Chenango County, New York).[9][10] His patrilineal family line was Dutch by way of New Jersey;[11] the surname had originally been "Edeson".[12]
His great-grandfather, loyalist John Edeson, fled New Jersey for Nova Scotia in 1784. The family moved to Middlesex County, Upper Canada around 1811, and his grandfather, Capt. Samuel Edison Sr. served with the 1st Middlesex Militia during the War of 1812. His father, Samuel Edison Jr. moved to Vienna, Ontario, and fled to Ohio after his involvement in the Rebellion of 1837.[13]
Edison was taught reading, writing, and arithmetic by his mother, a former school teacher. He attended school for only a few months. However, one biographer described him as a very curious child who learned most things by reading on his own.[14] As a child, he became fascinated with technology and spent hours working on experiments at home.[15]
Edison developed hearing problems at the age of 12. The cause of his deafness has been attributed to a bout of scarlet fever during childhood and recurring untreated middle-ear infections. He subsequently concocted elaborate fictitious stories about the cause of his deafness.[16] He was completely deaf in one ear and barely hearing in the other. It is alleged[17] that Edison would listen to a music player or piano by clamping his teeth into the wood to absorb the sound waves into his skull. As he got older, Edison believed his hearing loss allowed him to avoid distraction and concentrate more easily on his work. Modern-day historians and medical professionals have suggested he may have had ADHD.[15]
It is known that early in his career he enrolled in a chemistry course at The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art to support his work on a new telegraphy system with Charles Batchelor. This appears to have been his only enrollment in courses at an institution of higher learning.[18][19][20]
Early career
Thomas Edison began his career as a news butcher, selling newspapers, candy, and vegetables on trains running from Port Huron to Detroit. He turned a $50-a-week profit by age 13, most of which went to buying equipment for electrical and chemical experiments.[21] At age 15, in 1862, he saved 3-year-old Jimmie MacKenzie from being struck by a runaway train.[22] Jimmie's father, station agent J. U. MacKenzie of Mount Clemens, Michigan, was so grateful that he trained Edison as a telegraph operator. Edison's first telegraphy job away from Port Huron was at Stratford Junction, Ontario, on the Grand Trunk Railway.[23] He also studied qualitative analysis and conducted chemical experiments until he left the job rather than be fired after being held responsible for a near collision of two trains.[24][25][26]
Edison obtained the exclusive right to sell newspapers on the road, and, with the aid of four assistants, he set in type and printed the Grand Trunk Herald, which he sold with his other papers.[26] This began Edison's long streak of entrepreneurial ventures, as he discovered his talents as a businessman. Ultimately, his entrepreneurship was central to the formation of some 14 companies, including General Electric, formerly one of the largest publicly traded companies in the world.[27][28]
In 1866, at the age of 19, Edison moved to Louisville, Kentucky, where, as an employee of Western Union, he worked the Associated Press bureau news wire. Edison requested the night shift, which allowed him plenty of time to spend at his two favorite pastimes—reading and experimenting. Eventually, the latter pre-occupation cost him his job. One night in 1867, he was working with a lead–acid battery when he spilt sulfuric acid onto the floor. It ran between the floorboards and onto his boss's desk below. The next morning Edison was fired.[29]
His first patent was for the electric vote recorder, U.S. patent 90,646, which was granted on June 1, 1869.[30] Finding little demand for the machine, Edison moved to New York City shortly thereafter. One of his mentors during those early years was a fellow telegrapher and inventor named Franklin Leonard Pope, who allowed the impoverished youth to live and work in the basement of his Elizabeth, New Jersey, home, while Edison worked for Samuel Laws at the Gold Indicator Company. Pope and Edison founded their own company in October 1869, working as electrical engineers and inventors. Edison began developing a multiplex telegraphic system, which could send two messages simultaneously, in 1874.[31]
Menlo Park laboratory (1876–1886)
Research and development facility
Edison's Menlo Park Laboratory, reconstructed at Greenfield Village in Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan
Edison's Menlo Park Lab in 1880
Edison's major innovation was the establishment of an industrial research lab in 1876. It was built in Menlo Park, a part of Raritan Township (now named Edison Township in his honor) in Middlesex County, New Jersey, with the funds from the sale of Edison's quadruplex telegraph. After his demonstration of the telegraph, Edison was not sure that his original plan to sell it for $4,000 to $5,000 was right, so he asked Western Union to make a bid. He was surprised to hear them offer $10,000 ($269,294 in 2023), which he gratefully accepted.[32] The quadruplex telegraph was Edison's first big financial success, and Menlo Park became the first institution set up with the specific purpose of producing constant technological innovation and improvement. Edison was legally credited with most of the inventions produced there, though many employees carried out research and development under his direction. His staff was generally told to carry out his directions in conducting research, and he drove them hard to produce results.
William Joseph Hammer, a consulting electrical engineer, started working for Edison and began his duties as a laboratory assistant in December 1879. He assisted in experiments on the telephone, phonograph, electric railway, iron ore separator, electric lighting, and other developing inventions. However, Hammer worked primarily on the incandescent electric lamp and was put in charge of tests and records on that device.
In 1880, he was appointed chief engineer of the Edison Lamp Works. In his first year, the plant under general manager Francis Robbins Upton turned out 50,000 lamps. According to Edison, Hammer was "a pioneer of incandescent electric lighting".[33] Frank J. Sprague, a competent mathematician and former naval officer, was recruited by Edward H. Johnson and joined the Edison organization in 1883. One of Sprague's contributions to the Edison Laboratory at Menlo Park was to expand Edison's mathematical methods. Despite the common belief that Edison did not use mathematics, analysis of his notebooks reveal that he was an astute user of mathematical analysis conducted by his assistants such as Francis Robbins Upton, for example, determining the critical parameters of his electric lighting system including lamp resistance by an analysis of Ohm's Law, Joule's Law and economics.[34]
Nearly all of Edison's patents were utility patents, which were protected for 17 years and included inventions or processes that are electrical, mechanical, or chemical in nature. About a dozen were design patents, which protect an ornamental design for up to 14 years. As in most patents, the inventions he described were improvements over prior art. The phonograph patent, in contrast, was unprecedented in describing the first device to record and reproduce sounds.[35]
In just over a decade, Edison's Menlo Park laboratory had expanded to occupy two city blocks. Edison said he wanted the lab to have "a stock of almost every conceivable material".[36] A newspaper article printed in 1887 reveals the seriousness of his claim, stating the lab contained "eight thousand kinds of chemicals, every kind of screw made, every size of needle, every kind of cord or wire, hair of humans, horses, hogs, cows, rabbits, goats, minx, camels ... silk in every texture, cocoons, various kinds of hoofs, shark's teeth, deer horns, tortoise shell ... cork, resin, varnish and oil, ostrich feathers, a peacock's tail, jet, amber, rubber, all ores ..." and the list goes on.[37]
Over his desk Edison displayed a placard with Sir Joshua Reynolds' famous quotation: "There is no expedient to which a man will not resort to avoid the real labor of thinking."[38] This slogan was reputedly posted at several other locations throughout the facility.
In Menlo Park, Edison had created the first industrial laboratory concerned with creating knowledge and then controlling its application.[39] Edison's name is registered on 1,093 patents.[40]
Phonograph
Edison with the second model of his phonograph in Mathew Brady's studio in Washington, D.C. in April 1878
Edison began his career as an inventor in Newark, New Jersey, with the automatic repeater and his other improved telegraphic devices, but the invention that first gained him wider notice was the phonograph in 1877.[41] This accomplishment was so unexpected by the public at large as to appear almost magical. Edison became known as "The Wizard of Menlo Park".[5]
His first phonograph recorded on tinfoil around a grooved cylinder. Despite its limited sound quality and that the recordings could be played only a few times, the phonograph made Edison a celebrity. Joseph Henry, president of the National Academy of Sciences and one of the most renowned electrical scientists in the US, described Edison as "the most ingenious inventor in this country... or in any other".[42] In April 1878, Edison traveled to Washington to demonstrate the phonograph before the National Academy of Sciences, Congressmen, Senators and President Hayes.[43] The Washington Post described Edison as a "genius" and his presentation as "a scene... that will live in history".[44] Although Edison obtained a patent for the phonograph in 1878,[45] he did little to develop it until Alexander Graham Bell, Chichester Bell, and Charles Tainter produced a phonograph-like device in the 1880s that used wax-coated cardboard cylinders.[citation needed]
Carbon telephone transmitter
In 1876, Edison began work to improve the microphone for telephones (at that time called a "transmitter") by developing a carbon microphone, which consists of two metal plates separated by granules of carbon that would change resistance with the pressure of sound waves. A steady direct current is passed between the plates through the granules and the varying resistance results in a modulation of the current, creating a varying electric current that reproduces the varying pressure of the sound wave.
Up to that point, microphones, such as the ones developed by Johann Philipp Reis and Alexander Graham Bell, worked by generating a weak current. The carbon microphone works by modulating a direct current and, subsequently, using a transformer to transfer the signal so generated to the telephone line. Edison was one of many inventors working on the problem of creating a usable microphone for telephony by having it modulate an electric current passed through it.[46] His work was concurrent with Emile Berliner's loose-contact carbon transmitter (who lost a later patent case against Edison over the carbon transmitter's invention[47]) and David Edward Hughes’ study and published paper on the physics of loose-contact carbon transmitters (work that Hughes did not bother to patent).[46][48]
Edison used the carbon microphone concept in 1877 to create an improved telephone for Western Union.[47] In 1886, Edison found a way to improve a Bell Telephone microphone, one that used loose-contact ground carbon, with his discovery that it worked far better if the carbon was roasted. This type was put in use in 1890[47] and was used in all telephones along with the Bell receiver until the 1980s.
Electric light
Main article: Incandescent light bulb
Edison's first successful model of light bulb, used in public demonstration at Menlo Park, December 1879
In 1878, Edison began working on a system of electrical illumination, something he hoped could compete with gas and oil-based lighting.[49] He began by tackling the problem of creating a long-lasting incandescent lamp, something that would be needed for indoor use. However, Thomas Edison did not invent the light bulb.[50] In 1840, British scientist Warren de la Rue developed an efficient light bulb using a coiled platinum filament but the high cost of platinum kept the bulb from becoming a commercial success.[51] Many other inventors had also devised incandescent lamps, including Alessandro Volta's demonstration of a glowing wire in 1800 and inventions by Henry Woodward and Mathew Evans. Others who developed early and commercially impractical incandescent electric lamps included Humphry Davy, James Bowman Lindsay, Moses G. Farmer,[52] William E. Sawyer, Joseph Swan, and Heinrich Göbel.
These early bulbs all had flaws such as an extremely short life and requiring a high electric current to operate which made them difficult to apply on a large scale commercially.[53]: 217–218  In his first attempts to solve these problems, Edison tried using a filament made of cardboard, carbonized with compressed lampblack. This burnt out too quickly to provide lasting light. He then experimented with different grasses and canes such as hemp, and palmetto, before settling on bamboo as the best filament.[54] Edison continued trying to improve this design and on November 4, 1879, filed for U.S. patent 223,898 (granted on January 27, 1880) for an electric lamp using "a carbon filament or strip coiled and connected to platina contact wires".[55]
The patent described several ways of creating the carbon filament including "cotton and linen thread, wood splints, papers coiled in various ways".[55] It was not until several months after the patent was granted that Edison and his team discovered that a carbonized bamboo filament could last over 1,200 hours.[56]
Attempts to prevent blackening of the bulb due to emission of charged carbon from the hot filament[57] culminated in Edison effect bulbs, which redirected and controlled the mysterious unidirectional current.[58] Edison's 1883 patent for voltage-regulating[59] is notably the first US patent for an electronic device due to its use of an Edison effect bulb as an active component. Subsequent scientists studied, applied, and eventually evolved the bulbs into vacuum tubes, a core component of early analog and digital electronics of the 20th century.[57]
U.S. Patent #223898: Electric-Lamp, issued January 27, 1880
The Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company's new steamship, the Columbia, was the first commercial application for Edison's incandescent light bulb in 1880.
In 1878, Edison formed the Edison Electric Light Company in New York City with several financiers, including J. P. Morgan, Spencer Trask,[60] and the members of the Vanderbilt family. Edison made the first public demonstration of his incandescent light bulb on December 31, 1879, in Menlo Park. It was during this time that he said: "We will make electricity so cheap that only the rich will burn candles."[61]
Henry Villard, president of the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company, attended Edison's 1879 demonstration. Villard was impressed and requested Edison install his electric lighting system aboard Villard's company's new steamer, the Columbia. Although hesitant at first, Edison agreed to Villard's request. Most of the work was completed in May 1880, and the Columbia went to New York City, where Edison and his personnel installed Columbia's new lighting system. The Columbia was Edison's first commercial application for his incandescent light bulb. The Edison equipment was removed from Columbia in 1895.[62][63][64][65]
In 1880, Lewis Latimer, a draftsman and an expert witness in patent litigation, began working for the United States Electric Lighting Company run by Edison's rival Hiram S. Maxim.[66] While working for Maxim, Latimer invented a process for making carbon filaments for light bulbs and helped install broad-scale lighting systems for New York City, Philadelphia, Montreal, and London. Latimer holds the patent for the electric lamp issued in 1881, and a second patent for the "process of manufacturing carbons" (the filament used in incandescent light bulbs), issued in 1882.
On October 8, 1883, the US patent office ruled that Edison's patent was based on the work of William E. Sawyer and was, therefore, invalid. Litigation continued for nearly six years. In 1885, Latimer switched camps and started working with Edison.[67] On October 6, 1889, a judge ruled that Edison's electric light improvement claim for "a filament of carbon of high resistance" was valid.[68] To avoid a possible court battle with yet another competitor, Joseph Swan, who held an 1880 British patent on a similar incandescent electric lamp,[69] he and Swan formed a joint company called Ediswan to manufacture and market the invention in Britain.
The incandescent light bulb patented by Edison also began to gain widespread popularity in Europe as well. Mahen Theatre in Brno (in what is now the Czech Republic), opened in 1882, and was the first public building in the world to use Edison's electric lamps. Francis Jehl, Edison's assistant in the invention of the lamp, supervised the installation.[70] In September 2010, a sculpture of three giant light bulbs was erected in Brno, in front of the theater.[71] The first Edison light bulbs in the Nordic countries were installed at the weaving hall of the Finlayson's textile factory in Tampere, Finland in March 1882.[72]
In 1901 Edison attended the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. His company, the Edison Manufacturing Company, was given the task of installing the electric lights on the various buildings and structures that were built for the exposition. At night Edison made a panorama photograph of the illuminated buildings.[73]
Electric power distribution
After devising a commercially viable electric light bulb on October 21, 1879, Edison developed an electric "utility" to compete with the existing gas light utilities.[74] On December 17, 1880, he founded the Edison Illuminating Company, and during the 1880s, he patented a system for electricity distribution. The company established the first investor-owned electric utility. On September 4, 1882, in Pearl Street, New York City, his 600 kW cogeneration steam-powered generating station, Pearl Street Station's, electrical power distribution system was switched on, providing 110 volts direct current (DC), initially to 59 customers in lower Manhattan,[75] quickly growing to 508 customers with 10,164 lamps. The power station was decommissioned in 1895.
Eight months earlier in January 1882, to demonstrate feasibility, Edison had switched on the 93 kW first steam-generating power station at Holborn Viaduct in London. This was a smaller 110 V DC supply system, eventually supplying 3,000 street lights and a number of nearby private dwellings, but was shut down in September 1886 as uneconomic, since he was unable to extend the premises.
On January 19, 1883, the first standardized incandescent electric lighting system employing overhead wires began service in Roselle, New Jersey.
War of currents
Main article: War of the currents
Extravagant displays of electric lights quickly became a feature of public events, as in this picture from the Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition in 1897.
As Edison expanded his direct current (DC) power delivery system, he received stiff competition from companies installing alternating current (AC) systems. From the early 1880s, AC arc lighting systems for streets and large spaces had been an expanding business in the US. With the development of transformers in Europe and by Westinghouse Electric in the US in 1885–1886, it became possible to transmit AC long distances over thinner and cheaper wires, and "step down" (reduce) the voltage at the destination for distribution to users. This allowed AC to be used in street lighting and in lighting for small business and domestic customers, the market Edison's patented low voltage DC incandescent lamp system was designed to supply.[76] Edison's DC empire suffered from one of its chief drawbacks: it was suitable only for the high density of customers found in large cities. Edison's DC plants could not deliver electricity to customers more than one mile from the plant, and left a patchwork of unsupplied customers between plants. Small cities and rural areas could not afford an Edison style system, leaving a large part of the market without electrical service.[77] AC companies expanded into this gap.[78]
Edison expressed views that AC was unworkable and the high voltages used were dangerous. As George Westinghouse installed his first AC systems in 1886, Thomas Edison struck out personally against his chief rival stating, "Just as certain as death, Westinghouse will kill a customer within six months after he puts in a system of any size. He has got a new thing and it will require a great deal of experimenting to get it working practically."[79] Many reasons have been suggested for Edison's anti-AC stance. One notion is that the inventor could not grasp the more abstract theories behind AC and was trying to avoid developing a system he did not understand. Edison also appeared to have been worried about the high voltage from misinstalled AC systems killing customers and hurting the sales of electric power systems in general.[80] The primary reason was that Edison Electric based their design on low voltage DC, and switching a standard after they had installed over 100 systems was, in Edison's mind, out of the question. By the end of 1887, Edison Electric was losing market share to Westinghouse, who had built 68 AC-based power stations to Edison's 121 DC-based stations. To make matters worse for Edison, the Thomson-Houston Electric Company of Lynn, Massachusetts (another AC-based competitor) built 22 power stations.[81]
Parallel to expanding competition between Edison and the AC companies was rising public furor over a series of deaths in the spring of 1888 caused by pole mounted high voltage alternating current lines. This turned into a media frenzy against high voltage alternating current and the seemingly greedy and callous lighting companies that used it.[82][83] Edison took advantage of the public perception of AC as dangerous, and joined with self-styled New York anti-AC crusader Harold P. Brown in a propaganda campaign, aiding Brown in the public electrocution of animals with AC, and supported legislation to control and severely limit AC installations and voltages (to the point of making it an ineffective power delivery system) in what was now being referred to as a "war of the currents".[84] The development of the electric chair was used in an attempt to portray AC as having a greater lethal potential than DC and smear Westinghouse, via Edison colluding with Brown and Westinghouse's chief AC rival, the Thomson-Houston Electric Company, to ensure the first electric chair was powered by a Westinghouse AC generator.[85]
Edison was becoming marginalized in his own company having lost majority control in the 1889 merger that formed Edison General Electric.[86] In 1890 he told president Henry Villard he thought it was time to retire from the lighting business and moved on to an iron ore refining project that preoccupied his time.[87] Edison's dogmatic anti-AC values were no longer controlling the company. By 1889 Edison's Electric's own subsidiaries were lobbying to add AC power transmission to their systems and in October 1890 Edison Machine Works began developing AC-based equipment. Cut-throat competition and patent battles were bleeding off cash in the competing companies and the idea of a merger was being put forward in financial circles.[87] The War of Currents ended in 1892 when the financier J.P. Morgan engineered a merger of Edison General Electric with its main alternating current based rival, The Thomson-Houston Company, that put the board of Thomson-Houston in charge of the new company called General Electric. General Electric now controlled three-quarters of the US electrical business and would compete with Westinghouse for the AC market.[88][89] Edison served as a figurehead on the company's board of directors for a few years before selling his shares.[90]
Edison in 1889
West Orange and Fort Myers (1886–1931)
Thomas A. Edison Industries Exhibit, Primary Battery section, in 1915
Edison moved from Menlo Park after the death of his first wife, Mary, in 1884, and purchased a home known as "Glenmont" in 1886 as a wedding gift for his second wife, Mina, in Llewellyn Park in West Orange, New Jersey. In 1885, Thomas Edison bought 13 acres of property in Fort Myers, Florida, for roughly $2,750 (equivalent to $93,256 in 2023) and built what was later called Seminole Lodge as a winter retreat.[91] The main house and guest house are representative of Italianate architecture and Queen Anne style architecture. The building materials were pre-cut in New England by the Kennebec Framing Company and the Stephen Nye Lumber Company of Fairfield Maine. The materials were then shipped down by boat and were constructed at a cost of $12,000 each, which included the cost of interior furnishings.[92] Edison and Mina spent many winters at their home in Fort Myers, and Edison tried to find a domestic source of natural rubber.[93]
Due to the security concerns around World War I, Edison suggested forming a science and industry committee to provide advice and research to the US military, and he headed the Naval Consulting Board in 1915.[94]
Edison became concerned with America's reliance on foreign supply of rubber and was determined to find a native supply of rubber. Edison's work on rubber took place largely at his research laboratory in Fort Myers, which has been designated as a National Historic Chemical Landmark.[95]
The laboratory was built after Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and Harvey S. Firestone pulled together $75,000 to form the Edison Botanical Research Corporation. Initially, only Ford and Firestone were to contribute funds to the project, while Edison did all the research. Edison, however, wished to contribute $25,000 as well. Edison did the majority of the research and planting, sending results and sample rubber residues to his West Orange Lab. Edison employed a two-part Acid-base extraction, to derive latex from the plant material after it was dried and crushed to a powder.[96] After testing 17,000 plant samples, he eventually found an adequate source in the Goldenrod plant. Edison decided on Solidago leavenworthii, also known as Leavenworth's Goldenrod. The plant, which normally grows roughly 3–4 feet tall with a 5% latex yield, was adapted by Edison through cross-breeding to produce plants twice the size and with a latex yield of 12%.[97]
During the 1911 New York Electrical show, Edison told representatives of the copper industry it was a shame he did not have a "chunk of it". The representatives decided to give a cubic foot of solid copper weighing 486 pounds with their gratitude inscribed on it in appreciation for his part in the "continuous stimulation in the copper industry".[98][99][100]
Other inventions and projects
Fluoroscopy
Edison is credited with designing and producing the first commercially available fluoroscope, a machine that uses X-rays to take radiographs. Until Edison discovered that calcium tungstate fluoroscopy screens produced brighter images than the barium platinocyanide screens originally used by Wilhelm Röntgen, the technology was capable of producing only very faint images.
The fundamental design of Edison's fluoroscope is still in use today, although Edison abandoned the project after nearly losing his own eyesight and seriously injuring his assistant, Clarence Dally. Dally made himself an enthusiastic human guinea pig for the fluoroscopy project and was exposed to a poisonous dose of radiation; he later died (at the age of 39) of injuries related to the exposure, including mediastinal cancer.[101]
In 1903, a shaken Edison said: "Don't talk to me about X-rays, I am afraid of them."[102] Nonetheless, his work was important in the development of a technology still used today.[103]
Tasimeter
Edison invented a highly sensitive device, that he named the tasimeter, which measured infrared radiation. His impetus for its creation was the desire to measure the heat from the solar corona during the total Solar eclipse of July 29, 1878. The device was not patented since Edison could find no practical mass-market application for it.[104]
Telegraph improvements
The key to Edison's initial reputation and success was his work in the field of telegraphy. With knowledge gained from years of working as a telegraph operator, he learned the basics of electricity. This, together with his studies in chemistry at the Cooper Union, allowed him to make his early fortune with the stock ticker, the first electricity-based broadcast system.[18][19] His innovations also included the development of the quadruplex, the first system which could simultaneously transmit four messages through a single wire.[105]
Motion pictures
Duration: 24 seconds.0:24
The Leonard-Cushing Fight in June 1894; each of the six one-minute rounds recorded by the Kinetoscope was made available to exhibitors for $22.50.[106] Customers who watched the final round saw Leonard score a knockdown.
Edison was granted a patent for a motion picture camera, labeled the "Kinetograph". He did the electromechanical design while his employee William Kennedy Dickson, a photographer, worked on the photographic and optical development. Much of the credit for the invention belongs to Dickson.[53] In 1891, Thomas Edison built a Kinetoscope or peep-hole viewer. This device was installed in penny arcades, where people could watch short, simple films. The kinetograph and kinetoscope were both first publicly exhibited May 20, 1891.[107]
In April 1896, Thomas Armat's Vitascope, manufactured by the Edison factory and marketed in Edison's name, was used to project motion pictures in public screenings in New York City. Later, he exhibited motion pictures with voice soundtrack on cylinder recordings, mechanically synchronized with the film.
Officially the kinetoscope entered Europe when wealthy American businessman Irving T. Bush (1869–1948) bought a dozen machines from the Continental Commerce Company of Frank Z. Maguire and Joseph D. Baucus. Bush placed from October 17, 1894, the first kinetoscopes in London. At the same time, the French company Kinétoscope Edison Michel et Alexis Werner bought these machines for the market in France. In the last three months of 1894, the Continental Commerce Company sold hundreds of kinetoscopes in Europe (i.e. the Netherlands and Italy). In Germany and in Austria-Hungary, the kinetoscope was introduced by the Deutsche-österreichische-Edison-Kinetoscop Gesellschaft, founded by the Ludwig Stollwerck[108] of the Schokoladen-Süsswarenfabrik Stollwerck & Co of Cologne.
The first kinetoscopes arrived in Belgium at the Fairs in early 1895. The Edison's Kinétoscope Français, a Belgian company, was founded in Brussels on January 15, 1895, with the rights to sell the kinetoscopes in Monaco, France and the French colonies. The main investors in this company were Belgian industrialists. On May 14, 1895, the Edison's Kinétoscope Belge was founded in Brussels. Businessman Ladislas-Victor Lewitzki, living in London but active in Belgium and France, took the initiative in starting this business. He had contacts with Leon Gaumont and the American Mutoscope and Biograph Co. In 1898, he also became a shareholder of the Biograph and Mutoscope Company for France.[109]
Edison's film studio made nearly 1,200 films. The majority of the productions were short films showing everything from acrobats to parades to fire calls including titles such as Fred Ott's Sneeze (1894), The Kiss (1896), The Great Train Robbery (1903), Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1910), and the first Frankenstein film in 1910. In 1903, when the owners of Luna Park, Coney Island announced they would execute Topsy the elephant by strangulation, poisoning, and electrocution (with the electrocution part ultimately killing the elephant), Edison Manufacturing sent a crew to film it, releasing it that same year with the title Electrocuting an Elephant.
Duration: 23 minutes and 45 seconds.23:45
A Day with Thomas Edison (1922)
As the film business expanded, competing exhibitors routinely copied and exhibited each other's films.[110] To better protect the copyrights on his films, Edison deposited prints of them on long strips of photographic paper with the U.S. copyright office. Many of these paper prints survived longer and in better condition than the actual films of that era.[111]
In 1908, Edison started the Motion Picture Patents Company, which was a conglomerate of nine major film studios (commonly known as the Edison Trust). Thomas Edison was the first honorary fellow of the Acoustical Society of America, which was founded in 1929.
Edison said his favorite movie was The Birth of a Nation. He thought that talkies had "spoiled everything" for him. "There isn't any good acting on the screen. They concentrate on the voice now and have forgotten how to act. I can sense it more than you because I am deaf."[112] His favorite stars were Mary Pickford and Clara Bow.[113]
Mining
Starting in the late 1870s, Edison became interested and involved with mining. High-grade iron ore was scarce on the east coast of the United States and Edison tried to mine low-grade ore. Edison developed a process using rollers and crushers that could pulverize rocks up to 10 tons. The dust was then sent between three giant magnets that would pull the iron ore from the dust. Despite the failure of his mining company, the Edison Ore Milling Company, Edison used some of the materials and equipment to produce cement.[114]
In 1901, Edison visited an industrial exhibition in the Sudbury area in Ontario, Canada, and thought nickel and cobalt deposits there could be used in his production of electrical equipment. He returned as a mining prospector and is credited with the original discovery of the Falconbridge ore body. His attempts to mine the ore body were not successful, and he abandoned his mining claim in 1903.[115] A street in Falconbridge, as well as the Edison Building, which served as the head office of Falconbridge Mines, are named for him.
Rechargeable battery
Further information: Nickel–iron battery § History
Share of the Edison Storage Battery Company, issued October 19, 1903
In the late 1890s, Edison worked on developing a lighter, more efficient rechargeable battery (at that time called an "accumulator"). He looked on them as something customers could use to power their phonographs but saw other uses for an improved battery, including electric automobiles.[116] The then available lead acid rechargeable batteries were not very efficient and that market was already tied up by other companies so Edison pursued using alkaline instead of acid. He had his lab work on many types of materials (going through some 10,000 combinations), eventually settling on a nickel-iron combination. Besides his experimenting Edison also probably had access to the 1899 patents for a nickel–iron battery by the Swedish inventor Waldemar Jungner.[117]
Edison obtained a US and European patent for his nickel–iron battery in 1901 and founded the Edison Storage Battery Company, and by 1904 it had 450 people working there. The first rechargeable batteries they produced were for electric cars, but there were many defects, with customers complaining about the product. When the capital of the company was exhausted, Edison paid for the company with his private money. Edison did not demonstrate a mature product until 1910: a very efficient and durable nickel-iron-battery with lye as the electrolyte. The nickel–iron battery was never very successful; by the time it was ready, electric cars were disappearing, and lead acid batteries had become the standard for turning over gas-powered car starter motors.[117]
Chemicals
Further information: Great Phenol Plot
At the start of World War I, the American chemical industry was primitive: most chemicals were imported from Europe. The outbreak of war in August 1914 resulted in a shortage of imported chemicals. One of particular importance to Edison was phenol, which was used to make phonograph records—presumably as phenolic resins of the Bakelite type.[118]
At the time, phenol came from coal as a by-product of coke oven gases or manufactured gas for gas lighting. Phenol could be nitrated to picric acid and converted to ammonium picrate, a shock resistant high explosive suitable for use in artillery shells.[118] Most phenol had been imported from Britain, but with war, Parliament blocked exports and diverted most to production of ammonium picrate. Britain also blockaded supplies from Germany.[citation needed]
Edison responded by undertaking production of phenol at his Silver Lake facility using processes developed by his chemists.[119] He built two plants with a capacity of six tons of phenol per day. Production began the first week of September, one month after hostilities began in Europe. He built two plants to produce raw material benzene at Johnstown, Pennsylvania, and Bessemer, Alabama, replacing supplies previously from Germany. Edison manufactured aniline dyes, which previously had been supplied by the German dye trust. Other wartime products include xylene, p-phenylenediamine, shellac, and pyrax. Wartime shortages made these ventures profitable. In 1915, his production capacity was fully committed by midyear.[118]
Phenol was a critical material because two derivatives were in high growth phases. Bakelite, the original thermoset plastic, had been invented in 1909. Aspirin, too was a phenol derivative. Invented in 1899, it had become a blockbuster drug. Bayer had acquired a plant to manufacture in the US in Rensselaer, New York, but struggled to find phenol to keep their plant running during the war. Edison was able to oblige.[118]
Bayer relied on Chemische Fabrik von Heyden, in Piscataway, New Jersey, to convert phenol to salicylic acid, which they converted to aspirin. It is said that German companies bought up supplies of phenol to block production of ammonium picrate. Edison preferred not to sell phenol for military uses. He sold his surplus to Bayer, who had it converted to salicylic acid by Heyden, some of which was exported.[120][118]
Spirit Phone
In 1920, Edison spoke to American Magazine, saying that he had been working on a device for some time to see if it was possible to communicate with the dead.[121][122] Edison said the device would work on scientific principles, not by an occult means.[121] The press had a field day over Edison's remarks.[122][121] The actual nature of this invention remained a mystery, as there were no details revealed to the public. In 2015, Philippe Baudouin, a French journalist, found a copy of Edison's diary in a thrift store with a chapter not found in the previously published editions. The new chapter details Edison's theories of the afterlife and the scientific basis by which communication with the dead might be achieved.[121]
Final years
From left to right: Henry Ford, Edison, and Harvey S. Firestone in Fort Myers, Florida on February 11, 1929
Henry Ford, the automobile magnate, later lived a few hundred feet away from Edison at his winter retreat in Fort Myers. Ford once worked as an engineer for the Edison Illuminating Company of Detroit and met Edison at a convention of affiliated Edison Illuminating companies in Brooklyn, NY in 1896. Edison was impressed with Ford's internal combustion engine automobile and encouraged its developments. They were friends until Edison's death. Edison and Ford undertook annual motor camping trips from 1914 to 1924. Harvey Firestone and naturalist John Burroughs also participated.
In 1928, Edison joined the Fort Myers Civitan Club. He believed strongly in the organization, writing that "The Civitan Club is doing things—big things—for the community, state, and nation, and I certainly consider it an honor to be numbered in its ranks."[123] He was an active member in the club until his death, sometimes bringing Henry Ford to the club's meetings.
Edison was active in business right up to the end. Just months before his death, the Lackawanna Railroad inaugurated suburban electric train service from Hoboken to Montclair, Dover, and Gladstone, New Jersey. Electrical transmission for this service was by means of an overhead catenary system using direct current, which Edison had championed. Despite his frail condition, Edison was at the throttle of the first electric MU (Multiple-Unit) train to depart Lackawanna Terminal in Hoboken in September 1930, driving the train the first mile through Hoboken yard on its way to South Orange.[124]
This fleet of cars would serve commuters in North Jersey for the next 54 years until their retirement in 1984. A plaque commemorating Edison's inaugural ride can be seen today in the waiting room of Lackawanna Terminal in Hoboken, which is presently operated by NJ Transit.[124]
Edison was said to have been influenced by a popular fad diet in his last few years; "the only liquid he consumed was a pint of milk every three hours".[53] He is reported to have believed this diet would restore his health. However, this tale is doubtful. In 1930, the year before Edison died, Mina said in an interview about him, "Correct eating is one of his greatest hobbies."[125] She also said that during one of his periodic "great scientific adventures", Edison would be up at 7:00, have breakfast at 8:00, and be rarely home for lunch or dinner, implying that he continued to have all three.[112]
Edison became the owner of his Milan, Ohio, birthplace in 1906. On his last visit, in 1923, he was reportedly shocked to find his old home still lit by lamps and candles.[126]
Death
Edison died of complications of diabetes on October 18, 1931, in his home, "Glenmont" in Llewellyn Park in West Orange, New Jersey, which he had purchased in 1886 as a wedding gift for Mina. Rev. Stephen J. Herben officiated at the funeral;[127] Edison is buried behind the home.[128][129]
Edison's last breath is reportedly contained in a test tube at The Henry Ford museum near Detroit. Ford reportedly convinced Charles Edison to seal a test tube of air in the inventor's room shortly after his death, as a memento.[130] A plaster death mask and casts of Edison's hands were also made.[131] Mina died in 1947.
Marriages and children
On December 25, 1871, at the age of 24, Edison married 16-year-old Mary Stilwell (1855–1884), whom he had met two months earlier; she was an employee at one of his shops. They had three children:
Marion Estelle Edison (1873–1965), nicknamed "Dot"[132]
Thomas Alva Edison Jr. (1876–1935), nicknamed "Dash"[133]
William Leslie Edison (1878–1937) Inventor, graduate of the Sheffield Scientific School at Yale, 1900.[134]
Mary Edison died at age 29 on August 9, 1884, of unknown causes: possibly from a brain tumor[135] or a morphine overdose. Doctors frequently prescribed morphine to women in those years to treat a variety of causes, and researchers believe that her symptoms could have been from morphine poisoning.[136]
Edison generally preferred spending time in the laboratory to being with his family.[40]
Mina Miller Edison in 1906
On February 24, 1886, at the age of 39, Edison married the 20-year-old Mina Miller (1865–1947) in Akron, Ohio.[137] She was the daughter of the inventor Lewis Miller, co-founder of the Chautauqua Institution, and a benefactor of Methodist charities. They also had three children together:
Madeleine Edison (1888–1979), who married John Eyre Sloane.[138][139]
Charles Edison (1890–1969), Governor of New Jersey (1941–1944), who took over his father's company and experimental laboratories upon his father's death.[140]
Theodore Miller Edison (1898–1992), (MIT Physics 1923), credited with more than 80 patents.
Mina outlived Thomas Edison, dying on August 24, 1947.[141][142]
Wanting to be an inventor, but not having much of an aptitude for it, Thomas Edison's son, Thomas Alva Edison Jr., became a problem for his father and his father's business. Starting in the 1890s, Thomas Jr. became involved in snake oil products and shady and fraudulent enterprises producing products being sold to the public as "The Latest Edison Discovery". The situation became so bad that Thomas Sr. had to take his son to court to stop the practices, finally agreeing to pay Thomas Jr. an allowance of $35 (equivalent to $1,187 in 2023)[143] per week, in exchange for not using the Edison name; the son began using aliases, such as Burton Willard. Thomas Jr., experiencing alcoholism, depression and ill health, worked at several menial jobs, but by 1931 (towards the end of his life) he would obtain a role in the Edison company, thanks to the intervention of his half-brother Charles.[144][145]
Views
On religion and metaphysics
This 1910 New York Times Magazine feature states that "Nature, the supreme power, (Edison) recognizes and respects, but does not worship. Nature is not merciful and loving, but wholly merciless, indifferent." Edison is quoted as saying "I am not an individual—I am an aggregate of cells, as, for instance, New York City is an aggregate of individuals. Will New York City go to heaven?"
Historian Paul Israel has characterized Edison as a "freethinker".[53] Edison was heavily influenced by Thomas Paine's The Age of Reason.[53] Edison defended Paine's "scientific deism", saying, "He has been called an atheist, but atheist he was not. Paine believed in a supreme intelligence, as representing the idea which other men often express by the name of deity."[53] In 1878, Edison joined the Theosophical Society in New Jersey,[146] but according to its founder, Helena Blavatsky, he was not a very active member.[147] In an October 2, 1910, interview in the New York Times Magazine, Edison stated:
Nature is what we know. We do not know the gods of religions. And nature is not kind, or merciful, or loving. If God made me—the fabled God of the three qualities of which I spoke: mercy, kindness, love—He also made the fish I catch and eat. And where do His mercy, kindness, and love for that fish come in? No; nature made us—nature did it all—not the gods of the religions.[148]
Edison was labeled an atheist for those remarks, and although he did not allow himself to be drawn into the controversy publicly, he clarified himself in a private letter:
You have misunderstood the whole article, because you jumped to the conclusion that it denies the existence of God. There is no such denial, what you call God I call Nature, the Supreme intelligence that rules matter. All the article states is that it is doubtful in my opinion if our intelligence or soul or whatever one may call it lives hereafter as an entity or disperses back again from whence it came, scattered amongst the cells of which we are made.[53]
He also stated, "I do not believe in the God of the theologians; but that there is a Supreme Intelligence I do not doubt."[149] In 1920, Edison set off a media sensation when he told B. C. Forbes of American Magazine that he was working on a "spirit phone" to allow communication with the dead, a story which other newspapers and magazines repeated.[150] Edison later disclaimed the idea, telling the New York Times in 1926 that "I really had nothing to tell him, but I hated to disappoint him so I thought up this story about communicating with spirits, but it was all a joke."[151]
On politics
Edison was a supporter of women's suffrage.[152] He said in 1915, "Every woman in this country is going to have the vote."[152] Edison notably signed onto a statement supporting women's suffrage which was published to counter anti-suffragist literature spread by Senator James Edgar Martine.[153]
Nonviolence was key to Edison's political and moral views, and when asked to serve as a naval consultant for World War I, he specified he would work only on defensive weapons and later noted, "I am proud of the fact that I never invented weapons to kill." Edison's philosophy of nonviolence extended to animals as well, about which he stated: "Nonviolence leads to the highest ethics, which is the goal of all evolution. Until we stop harming all other living beings, we are still savages."[154][155] He was a vegetarian but not a vegan in actual practice, at least near the end of his life.[53] Following a tour of Europe in 1911, Edison spoke negatively about "the belligerent nationalism that he had sensed in every country he visited".[156]
Edison was an advocate for monetary reform in the United States. He was ardently opposed to the gold standard and debt-based money. Famously, he was quoted in the New York Times as stating: "Gold is a relic of Julius Caesar, and interest is an invention of Satan."[157] In the same article, he expounded upon the absurdity of a monetary system in which the taxpayer of the United States, in need of a loan, can be compelled to pay in return perhaps double the principal, or even greater sums, due to interest. Edison argued that, if the government can produce debt-based money, it could equally as well produce money that was a credit to the taxpayer.[157]
In May 1922, he published a proposal, entitled "A Proposed Amendment to the Federal Reserve Banking System".[158] In it, he detailed an explanation of a commodity-backed currency, in which the Federal Reserve would issue interest-free currency to farmers, based on the value of commodities they produced. During a publicity tour that he took with friend and fellow inventor, Henry Ford, he spoke publicly about his desire for monetary reform. For insight, he corresponded with prominent academic and banking professionals. In the end, however, Edison's proposals failed to find support and were abandoned.[159][160]
Awards
Portrait of Edison by Abraham Archibald Anderson (1890), National Portrait Gallery
The following is an incomplete list of awards given to Edison during his lifetime and posthumously:
In 1878, Edison was awarded an honorary PhD from Union College[161]
The President of the Third French Republic, Jules Grévy, on the recommendation of his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire, and with the presentations of the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, Louis Cochery, designated Edison with the distinction of an Officer of the Legion of Honour (Légion d'honneur) by decree on November 10, 1881;[162] Edison was also named a Chevalier in the Legion in 1879, and a Commander in 1889.[163]
In 1887, Edison won the Matteucci Medal. In 1890, he was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.
In 1927, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society.[164]
The Philadelphia City Council named Edison the recipient of the John Scott Medal in 1889.[163]
In 1899, Edison was awarded the Edward Longstreth Medal of The Franklin Institute.[165]
He was named an Honorable Consulting Engineer at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition World's fair in 1904.[163]
In 1908, Edison received the American Association of Engineering Societies John Fritz Medal.[163]
In 1915, Edison was awarded Franklin Medal of The Franklin Institute for discoveries contributing to the foundation of industries and the well-being of the human race.[166]
In 1920, the United States Navy department awarded him the Navy Distinguished Service Medal.[163]
In 1923, the American Institute of Electrical Engineers created the Edison Medal and he was its first recipient.[163]
In 1927, he was granted membership in the National Academy of Sciences.[163]
On May 29, 1928, Edison received the Congressional Gold Medal.[163]
In 1983, the United States Congress, pursuant to Senate Joint Resolution 140 (Public Law 97–198), designated February 11, Edison's birthday, as National Inventor's Day.[167]
Life magazine (USA), in a special double issue in 1997, placed Edison first in the list of the "100 Most Important People in the Last 1000 Years", noting that the light bulb he promoted "lit up the world". In the 2005 television series The Greatest American, he was voted by viewers as the fifteenth greatest.
In 2008, Edison was inducted in the New Jersey Hall of Fame.
In 2010, Edison was honored with a Technical Grammy Award.
In 2011, Edison was inducted into the Entrepreneur Walk of Fame and named a Great Floridian by the governor and cabinet of Florida.[168]
Commemorations and popular culture
Main articles: Thomas Edison in popular culture and List of things named after Thomas Edison
Thomas Edison issues of 1929 and 1947
Thomas Edison has been honored twice with two different U.S. postage stamps. The first was released in 1929 at Menlo Park, NJ, two years before his death; a 2-cent red, on the 50th anniversary of his invention of the incandescent light, and again in 1947, 3-cent violet, on the 100th anniversary of his birth, first released in Milan, Ohio, his place of birth.[169][170]
Edison has also appeared in popular culture as a character in novels, films, television shows, comics and video games. His prolific inventing helped make him an icon, and he has made appearances in popular culture during his lifetime down to the present day. Edison is also portrayed in popular culture as an adversary of Nikola Tesla.[171]
People who worked for Edison
The following is a list of people who worked for Thomas Edison in his laboratories at Menlo Park or West Orange or at the subsidiary electrical businesses that he supervised.
Edward Goodrich Acheson – chemist, worked at Menlo Park 1880–1884
William Symes Andrews – started at the Menlo Park machine shop 1879
Charles Batchelor – "chief experimental assistant"
John I. Beggs – manager of Edison Illuminating Company in New York, 1886
William Kennedy Dickson – joined Menlo Park in 1883, worked on the motion picture camera
Justus B. Entz – joined Edison Machine Works in 1887
Reginald Fessenden – worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1886
Henry Ford – engineer Edison Illuminating Company Detroit, Michigan, 1891–1899
William Joseph Hammer – started as laboratory assistant Menlo Park in 1879
Miller Reese Hutchison – inventor of hearing aid
Edward Hibberd Johnson – started in 1909, chief engineer at West Orange laboratory 1912–1918
Samuel Insull – started in 1881, rose to become VP of General Electric (1892) then President of Chicago Edison
Kunihiko Iwadare – joined Edison Machine Works in 1887
Francis Jehl – laboratory assistant Menlo Park 1879–1882
Arthur E. Kennelly – engineer, experimentalist at West Orange laboratory 1887–1894
John Kruesi – started 1872, was head machinist, at Newark, Menlo Park, Edison Machine Works
Lewis Howard Latimer – hired 1884 as a draftsman, continued working for General Electric
John W. Lieb – worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1881
Thomas Commerford Martin – electrical engineer, worked at Menlo Park 1877–1879
George F. Morrison – started at Edison Lamp Works 1882
Edwin Stanton Porter – joined the Edison Manufacturing Company 1899
Frank J. Sprague – joined Menlo Park 1883, became known as the "Father of Electric Traction".
Nikola Tesla – electrical engineer and inventor, worked at the Edison Machine Works in 1884
Francis Robbins Upton – mathematician/physicist, joined Menlo Park 1878
Theo Wangemann – personal assistant to Edison
See also
Edison Pioneers – a group formed in 1918 by employees and other associates of Thomas Edison
Thomas Alva Edison Birthplace
References
Adrian Wooldridge (September 15, 2016). "The alphabet of success". The Economist. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016.
Sproule, Anna (2000). Thomas Alva Edison: The World's Greatest Inventor (1st U.S. ed.). Woodbridge, CT: Blackbirch Press. ISBN 978-1-56711-331-0.
"Hangout – Thomas Edison". state.nj.us. State of New Jersey.
"Con Edison: A Brief History of Con Edison – electricity". Coned.com. January 1, 1998. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved October 11, 2012.
"The Wizard of Menlo Park". The Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on March 5, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
Walsh, Bryan (July 15, 2009). "The Electrifying Edison". Time. Archived from the original on July 18, 2009. Retrieved December 31, 2013.
Boyer, Paul S., ed. (2001). The Oxford Companion to United States History. Oxford University Press. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-19-989109-2. OCLC 57680178.
"Edison's Early Years". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020.
"Edison, Thomas A., Birthplace". National Historic Landmarks Program. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2013.
Bedi, Joyce (April 18, 2004). "Thomas Edison's Inventive Life". Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation. Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018.. Retrieved March 31, 2018
The Yankee Road: Tracing the Journey of the New England Tribe that Created Modern America, Vol. 2: Domination. Wheatmark, Inc. March 7, 2018. p. 146. ISBN 978-1-62787-519-6. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2018.
Baldwin, Neal (1995). Edison: Inventing the Century. Hyperion. pp. 3–5. ISBN 978-0-7868-6041-8.
"Samuel and Nancy Elliott Edison – Thomas Edison National Historical Park (U.S. National Park Service)". Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021.
"Edison Biography". National Park Service. Archived from the original on June 24, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
The Near-Death Experience That Set Thomas Edison on the Road to Fame Archived July 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Barbara Maranzani, March 5, 2020.
The medical mystery that helped make Thomas Edison an inventor Archived July 20, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, PBS, October 22, 2018.
"Thomas Edison's Greatest Invention". atlantic.com. October 13, 2019. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019.
Conot, Robert (1979). Thomas A. Edison: A Streak of Luck. New York: Da Capo Press.
Topper, Robert Q. "Thomas Edison, Chemistry and Cooper Union". Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021.
Thomas Edison Is An Innovative Icon, And Here's Why Archived July 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, Odyssey, March 26, 2018.
Derek Thompson (2019). "Thomas Edison's Greatest Invention". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019.
Maranzani, Barbara (October 15, 2020). "Thomas Edison's Near-Death Experience Set Him on the Road to Fame". Biography. Retrieved September 23, 2022.
Baldwin, p. 37
Bryan, Mike (2017). "Edison the Man and His Life (Part One): The First 30 Years". www.capsnews.org. Retrieved September 23, 2022.
Riedstra, L. (2010). "Stratford's Railway Industry" (PDF). Visit Stratford. Stratford Tourism. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 7, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017.
Homans, James E., ed. (1918). "Edison, Thomas Alva" . The Cyclopædia of American Biography. New York: The Press Association Compilers, Inc.
"GE emerges world's largest company: Forbes". Trading Markets.com. April 10, 2009. Archived from the original on August 5, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2010.
"GE emerges world's largest company: Forbes". The Indian Express. April 9, 2009. Archived from the original on March 28, 2010. Retrieved February 7, 2010.
Baldwin, pp. 40–41
The Edison Papers Archived February 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers University. Retrieved March 20, 2007.
"Life of Thomas Alva Edison" Archived October 17, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Inventing Entertainment: The Early Motion Pictures and Sound Recordings of the Edison Companies, Library of Congress.
Trollinger, Vernon (February 11, 2013). "Happy Birthday, Thomas Edison!". Bounce Energy. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.
"The Thomas A. Edison Papers". Edison.rutgers.edu. Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved January 29, 2009.
Evans, Harold (2004), They Made America. New York: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-27766-2. p. 152.
Wilson, Wendell E. "Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931)". The Mineralogical Record. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
Shulman, Seth (1999). Owning the Future. Houghton Mifflin Company. pp. 158–160. ISBN 9780395841754.
"AERONAUTICS: Real Labor". Time. December 8, 1930. Archived from the original on January 25, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2008.
Israel, Paul. "Edison's Laboratory". The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
"Business: The Quintessential Innovator". Time. October 22, 1979. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 23, 2016.
"The Life of Thomas A. Edison". The Library of Congress. Archived from the original on January 20, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
Edison, Thomas A. 1989. Menlo Park: The early years, April 1876 – December 1877. Edited by P. B. Israel, K. A. Nier and L. Carlat. Vol. 3, The papers of Thomas A Edison. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Doc. 1117
Baldwin, Neil. 2001. Edison: Inventing the century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 97–98.
"Genius before science". The Washington Post, April 19, 1878.
Edison, Thomas A. 1877. Telephones or speaking-telegraphs. US patent 203,018 filed December 13, 1877, and issued April 30, 1878.
Hope, Adrian (May 11, 1978), "100 Years of Microphone", New Scientist, Vol. 78, No. 1102, p. 378. ISSN 0262-4079.
IEEE Global History Network: Carbon Transmitter. New Brunswick, NJ: IEEE History Center "Carbon Transmitter". Archived from the original on March 18, 2010. Retrieved January 14, 2009.
Worrall, Dan M. (2007), "David Edward Hughes: Concertinist and Inventor" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
Howard B. Rockman, Intellectual Property Law for Engineers and Scientists, John Wiley & Sons – 2004, p. 131.
Ings, Simon (July 26, 2019), "The real history of electricity is more gripping than The Current War", New Scientist. Archived July 18, 2020, at the Wayback Machine.
Who Invented the Light Bulb? Archived June 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine LiveScience, August 17, 2017
"Moses G. Farmer, Eliot's Inventor". Archived from the original on June 19, 2006. Retrieved March 11, 2006.
Israel, Paul (2000). Edison: A Life of Invention. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-36270-8.
Thomas A. Edison Papers Archived September 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers School of Arts and Sciences
U.S. patent 0,223,898
Flannery, L. G. (Pat) (1960). John Hunton's Diary, Volume 3. pp. 68, 69.
Johnson, J. B. (December 1, 1960). "Contribution of Thomas A. Edison to Thermionics". American Journal of Physics. 28 (9): 763–773. doi:10.1119/1.1935997. ISSN 0002-9505.
Preece, William Henry (1885). "On a peculiar behaviour of glow lamps when raised to high incandescence". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. 38 (235–238): 219–230. doi:10.1098/rspl.1884.0093. ISSN 0370-1662. Archived from the original on June 26, 2014. Preece coins the term the "Edison effect" on page 229.
US 307031, Edison, Thomas A., "Electrical indicator", published 1884-10-21
"Handbook of Research on Venture Capital". Colin Mason. Edward Elgar Publishing. January 1, 2012. pg 17
"Keynote Address – Second International ALN1 Conference (PDF)". Archived from the original on June 13, 2010.
Jehl, Francis Menlo Park reminiscences : written in Edison's restored Menlo Park laboratory Archived January 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village, Whitefish, Mass, Kessinger Publishing, July 1, 2002, p. 564.
Dalton, Anthony A long, dangerous coastline: shipwreck tales from Alaska to California Archived January 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Heritage House Publishing Company, February 1, 2011 – 128 pp.
Swann, p. 242.
"Lighting A Revolution: 19th Century Promotion". Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on October 10, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.
"Lewis Howard Latimer". National Park Service. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2007.
Mock, Brentin (February 11, 2015), Meet Lewis Latimer, the African American who enlightened Thomas Edison, Grist. Archived July 18, 2020, at the Wayback Machine.
Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.
Swan, Kenneth R. (1946). Sir Joseph Swan and the Invention of the Incandescent Electric Lamp. Longmans, Green and Co., London. pp. 21–25.
"About the Memory of a Theatre". National Theatre Brno. Archived from the original on January 19, 2008. Retrieved December 30, 2007.
Michal Kašpárek (September 8, 2010). "Sculpture of three giant light bulbs: in memory of Thomas Alva Edison". Brnonow.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2013.
Kautonen, Mika (November 18, 2015). "A history of continuous change and innovation". Smart Tampere Ecosystem. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021.
"Panorama of Esplanade by night". Library of Congress. 1901. Retrieved November 24, 2023.
Ahmad Faruqui, Kelly Eakin, Pricing in Competitive Electricity Markets, Springer Science & Business Media – 2000, p. 67
"A brief history of Con Edison:"Electricity"". Coned.com. January 1, 1998. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2013.
Jill Jonnes, Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, And The Race To Electrify The World, Random House – 2004, pp. 54–60.
Thomas Parke Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930, p.80-90, (1993)
Coltman, J. W. (January 1988). "The Transformer". Scientific American. pp. 86–95. OSTI 6851152.
Maury Klein (2008), The Power Makers: Steam, Electricity, and the Men Who Invented Modern America, Bloomsbury Publishing US, p. 257
Jonnes (2004), Empires Of Light, p. 146.
Robert l. Bradley, Jr (2011). Edison to Enron. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-19251-1. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.
Jonnes (2004), Empires of Light, p. 143.
Essig, Mark (2009), Edison and the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death, Bloomsbury Publishing US, pp. 139–140.
Carlson, W. Bernard (2003). Innovation as a Social Process: Elihu Thomson and the Rise of General Electric. Cambridge University Press. p. 285. ISBN 978-0-52153-312-6
Reynolds, Terry S.; Bernstein, Theodore (March 1989). "Edison and "The Chair"" (PDF). Technology and Society. Vol. 8, no. 1. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Sloat, Warren (1979). 1929: America Before the Crash. New York: Macmillan. p. 316. ISBN 978-0-02611-800-2.
Bradley, Robert L. Jr., Edison to Enron: Energy Markets and Political Strategies, New York: John Wiley & Sons (2011), pp. 28–29
Essig, Mark (2009)Edison and the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death, Bloomsbury Publishing US, p. 268.
Bradley Jr., Robert L. (2011), Edison to Enron: Energy Markets and Political Strategies, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 28–29.
Gryta, Thomas; Mann, Ted (2021). Lights out: pride, delusion, and the fall of General Electric. Boston New York: Mariner Books, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-358-25041-8.
Cosden, M. (2015). Edison and Ford in Florida. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 9781467114646
"Edison and Ford Winter Estates. Media kit. Retrieved on 10/9/2019" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019.
Reisert, Sarah (2016). "Home Away from Home". Distillations. Vol. 2, no. 2. pp. 46–47. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018.
"Thomas Edison's Vision". United States Navy. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2013. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels seized the opportunity created by Edison's public comments to enlist Edison's support. He agreed to serve as the head of a new body of civilian experts – the Naval Consulting Board – to advise the Navy on science and technology.
"Edison Botanic Research Laboratory – Edison & Ford Winter Estates – (239) 334-7419". Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2016.
"Green Chemistry: The Nexus Blog: Thomas Edison'... | ACS Network". communities.acs.org. May 21, 2014. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.
Growing American Rubber by Mark Finlay.
LeCain, Timothy J. (June 22, 2009). Mass Destruction: The Men and Giant Mines That Wired America and Scarred the Planet. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 9780813548562. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.
Worthington, George (1911). Electrical Review. McGraw-Hill Publishing Company. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.
Tyer, Brad (March 26, 2013). Opportunity, Montana: Big Copper, Bad Water, and the Burial of an American Landscape. Beacon Press. ISBN 9780807003305. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.
"Thomas Edison". Radiopaedia. June 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2020. He spent hours blowing glass tubes, which were laced with calcium tungstate, for an early model fluoroscope.
Duke University Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library: "Edison fears the hidden perils of the x-rays". New York World, August 3, 1903, Durham, NC.
"Thomas Edison". Radiopaedia. June 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2020. Radiology Legacy, invention of fluoroscopy
Baron, David (June 6, 2017). American Eclipse: A Nation's Epic Race to Catch the Shadow of the Moon and Win the Glory of the World. Liveright. p. 223. ISBN 978-1631490163. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020.
Josephson, Matthew. "Thomas Edison: American Inventor". Britannica. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2021.
Leonard–Cushing fight Archived September 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Part of the Library of Congress/Inventing Entertainment educational website. Retrieved December 14, 2006.
"History of Edison Motion Pictures". Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved October 14, 2007.
"Martin Loiperdinger. Film & Schokolade. Stollwercks Geschäfte mit lebenden Bildern. KINtop Schriften Stroemfeld Verlag, Frankfurt am Main, Basel 1999 ISBN 3878777604 (Book and Videocassette)". Victorian-cinema.net. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved January 29, 2009.
Guido Convents, Van Kinetoscoop tot Cafe-Cine de Eerste Jaren van de Film in Belgie, 1894–1908, pp. 33–69. Universitaire Pers Leuven. Leuven: 2000. Guido Convents, "Edison's Kinetscope in Belgium, or, Scientists, Admirers, Businessmen, Industrialists and Crooks", pp. 249–258. in C. Dupré la Tour, A. Gaudreault, R. Pearson (eds), Cinema at the Turn of the Century. Québec, 1999.
Siegmund Lubin (1851–1923) Archived August 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Who's Who of Victorian Cinema. Retrieved August 20, 2007.
"History of Edison Motion Pictures: Early Edison Motion Picture Production (1892–1895)". Archived August 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Memory.loc.gov, Library of Congress. Retrieved August 20, 2007.
Reader's Digest, March 1930, pp. 1042–1044, "Living With a Genius", condensed from The American Magazine, February 1930.
"Edison Wears Silk Nightshirt, Hates Talkies, Writes Wife", Capital Times, October 30, 1930
"Edison's Companies – The Edison Papers". Archived from the original on October 8, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2016.
"Thomas Edison". Greater Sudbury Heritage Museums. Archived from the original on September 10, 2010. Retrieved December 30, 2007.
David John Cole, Eve Browning, Eve Browning Cole, Fred E. H. Schroeder, Encyclopedia of Modern Everyday Inventions, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003, pages 45–46
Seth Fletcher, Bottled Lightning: Superbatteries, Electric Cars, and the New Lithium Economy, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, May 10, 2011, pages 14–16
Mann CC, Plummer ML (1991). The Aspirin Wars: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 38–41. ISBN 978-0-394-57894-1.
Conot, Robert (1979), A Streak of Luck: The Life & Legend of Thomas Alva Edison, Seaview Books, NY, pp. 413–414
Nilsson, Jeff (March 6, 2019). "Aspirin: The First Wonder Drug". The Saturday Evening Post.
Zarrelli, Natalie (October 18, 2016). "Dial-a-Ghost on Thomas Edison's Least Successful Invention: the Spirit Phone". Atlas Obscura. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
Tablang, Kristin (October 25, 2019). "Thomas Edison, B.C. Forbes And The Mystery Of The Spirit Phone". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021.
Armbrester, Margaret E. (1992). The Civitan Story. Birmingham, AL: Ebsco Media. p. 34.
Holland, Kevin J. (2001). Classic American Railroad Terminals. Osceola, WI: MBI. ISBN 9780760308325. OCLC 45908903.
Edison at Home Archived May 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine The Brooklyn Daily Eagle. May 24, 1930.
"His Life". The Thomas Edison Birthplace Museum. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020.
"Rev. S. Herben Dead at 75". Plainfield Courier-News. Plainfield, New Jersey. February 23, 1937. p. 11. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved March 19, 2018 – via Newspapers.com. Free access icon
"Thomas Edison Dies in Coma at 84; Family With Him as the End Comes; Inventor Succumbs at 3:24 am. After Fight for Life Since He Was Stricken on August 1. World-Wide Tribute Is Paid to Him as a Benefactor of Mankind". The New York Times. October 18, 1931. West Orange, New Jersey, Sunday, October 18, 1931. Thomas Alva Edison died at 3:24 o'clock this morning at his home, Glenmont, in the Llewellyn Park section of this city. The great inventor, the fruits of whose genius so magically transformed the everyday world, was 84 years and 8 months old.
Benoit, Tod (2003). Where are they buried? How did they die?. Black Dog & Leventhal. p. 560. ISBN 978-1-57912-678-0.
"Is Thomas Edison's last breath preserved in a test tube in the Henry Ford Museum?" Archived September 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, The Straight Dope, September 11, 1987. Retrieved August 20, 2007.
Neil Baldwin, Edison: Inventing the Century, University of Chicago Press – 2001, 408
Baldwin 1995, p.60
Baldwin 1995, p.67
"Older Son To Sue To Void Edison Will; William, Second Child of the Counsel". The New York Times. October 31, 1931. The will of Thomas A. Edison, filed in Newark last Thursday, which leaves the bulk of the inventor's $12 million estate to the sons of his second wife, was attacked as unfair yesterday by William L. Edison, second son of the first wife, who announced at the same time that he would sue to break it.
"The Life of Thomas Edison" Archived January 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, American Memory, Library of Congress. Retrieved March 3, 2009.
"Thomas Edison's First Wife May Have Died of a Morphine Overdose" Archived November 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Rutgers Today. Retrieved November 18, 2011
"Thomas Edison's Children". IEEE Global History Network. IEEE. December 16, 2010. Archived from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2011.
"Madeleine Edison a Bride. Inventor's Daughter Married to J. E. Sloan by Mgr. Brann". The New York Times. June 18, 1914.
"Mrs. John Eyre Sloane Has a Son at the Harbor Sanitarium Here". The New York Times. January 10, 1931.
"Charles Edison, 78, Ex-Governor of Jersey and U.S. Aide, Is Dead". The New York Times. August 1969.
"Edison's Widow Very III". The New York Times. August 21, 1947.
"Rites for Mrs. Edison". The New York Times. August 26, 1947.
1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved February 29, 2024.
René Rondeau (1997). "LOST IN HISTORY: Thomas A. Edison, Junior". Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
"Thomas Alva Edison Jr". National Park Service. Archived from the original on April 20, 1997. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
"Theosophical Society Members 1875–1942 – Historical membership list of the Theosophical Society (Adyar) 1875–1942". tsmembers.org. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018.
Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna (1980). Collected Writings, Vol. XII. Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House. p. 130.
""No Immortality of the Soul" says Thomas A. Edison. In Fact, He Doesn't Believe There Is a Soul—Human Beings Only an Aggregate of Cells and the Brain Only a Wonderful Machine, Says Wizard of Electricity". The New York Times. October 2, 1910. Thomas A. Edison in the following interview for the first time speaks to the public on the vital subjects of the human soul and immortality. It will be bound to be a most fascinating, an amazing statement, from one of the most notable and interesting men of the age ... Nature is what we know. We do not know the gods of religions. And nature is not kind, or merciful, or loving. If God made me—the fabled God of the three qualities of which I spoke: mercy, kindness, love—He also made the fish I catch and eat. And where do His mercy, kindness, and love for that fish come in? No; nature made us—nature did it all—not the gods of the religions.
The Freethinker Archived June 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (1970), G.W. Foote & Company, Volume 90, p. 147
"Edison's Forgotten 'Invention': A Phone That Calls the Dead". GE Reports. October 28, 2010. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013.
"Invention Geek – Edison Spirit Phone?". Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
"Edison Comes Out Unqalifiedly for Suffrage". Passaic Daily News. October 7, 1915. p. 12. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.
"Edison, Harvey, Hughes and Other Leading Men Refute Senator Martine". Passaic Daily News. October 7, 1915. p. 12. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.
Cited in Innovate Like Edison: The Success System of America's Greatest Inventor Archived June 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine by Sarah Miller Caldicott, Michael J. Gelb, p. 37.
"Vegetarianism Quotes from Noteworthy People". Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016.
"Review: Thomas Edison's life of ceaseless action". America Magazine. April 24, 2020. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021.
"Ford sees wealth in muscle shoals" (PDF). The New York Times. December 6, 1921. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 14, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
Edison, 1922.
Hammes, D.L.; Wills, D.T. (2006). "Thomas Edison's Monetary Option". Journal of the History of Economic Thought. 28 (3): 295. doi:10.1080/10427710600857773. S2CID 154880573.
Hammes, David L. (2012). Harvesting Gold: Thomas Edison's Experiment to Re-Invent American Money. Mahler Publishing.
Scientific American. Munn & Company. July 13, 1878. p. 21. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021.
The same decree awarded German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz with the designation of Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, as well as Alexander Graham Bell. The decree preamble cited "for services provided to the Congress and to the International Electrical Exhibition"
Kennelly, Arthur E. (1932). Biographical Memoir of Thomas Alva Edison (PDF). National Academy of Sciences. pp. 300–301. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2012.
"APS Member History". search.amphilsoc.org. Retrieved March 7, 2024.
"Franklin Laureate Database – Edward Longstreth Medal 1899 Laureates". Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
"Thomas Alva Edison – Acknowledgement". The Franklin Institute. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
"Proclamation 5013 – National Inventors' Day, 1983". Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2013.
"Great Floridian Program". Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved April 2, 2012.
"Thomas A. Edison Issue". U.S. Post office; Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Retrieved November 23, 2023.
Scotts Specialized Catalogue of United States Postage Stamps. New York: Scotts Publishing Company. pp. 88, 122.
Knapp, Alex (May 18, 2012). "Nikola Tesla Wasn't God and Thomas Edison Wasn't the Devil". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017.
Bibliography
Albion, Michele Wehrwein. (2008). The Florida Life of Thomas Edison. Gainesville: University Press of Florida. ISBN 978-0-8130-3259-7.
Angel, Ernst (1926). Edison. Sein Leben und Erfinden. Berlin: Ernst Angel Verlag.
Baldwin, Neil (1995). Edison: Inventing the Century. Hyperion. ISBN 978-0-226-03571-0.
Clark, Ronald William (1977). Edison: The man who made the future. London: Macdonald & Jane's: Macdonald and Jane's. ISBN 978-0-354-04093-8.
Conot, Robert (1979). A Streak of Luck. New York: Seaview Books. ISBN 978-0-87223-521-2.
Davis, L. J. (1998). Fleet Fire: Thomas Edison and the Pioneers of the Electric Revolution. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-47927-1.
Essig, Mark (2004). Edison and the Electric Chair. Stroud: Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-3680-4.
Essig, Mark (2003). Edison & the Electric Chair: A Story of Light and Death. New York: Walker & Company. ISBN 978-0-8027-1406-0.
Israel, Paul (1998). Edison: A Life of Invention. New York: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-52942-2.
Jonnes, Jill (2003). Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, and the Race to Electrify the World. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50739-7.
Josephson, Matthew (1959). Edison. McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-033046-7.
Koenigsberg, Allen (1987). Edison Cylinder Records, 1889–1912. APM Press. ISBN 978-0-937612-07-1.
Pretzer, William S., ed. (1989). Working at Inventing: Thomas A. Edison and the Menlo Park Experience. Dearborn, Michigan: Henry Ford Museum & Greenfield Village. ISBN 978-0-933728-33-2.
Stross, Randall E. (2007). The Wizard of Menlo Park: How Thomas Alva Edison Invented the Modern World. Crown. ISBN 978-1-4000-4762-8.
External links
Thomas Edison
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
External videos
video icon Booknotes interview with Neil Baldwin on Edison: Inventing the Century, March 19, 1995, C-SPAN
video icon Booknotes interview with Jill Jonnes on Empires of Light, October 26, 2003, C-SPAN
"An Hour with Edison", Scientific American, July 13, 1878, p. 17
Interview with Thomas Edison in 1931
The Diary of Thomas Edison
Works by Thomas Edison at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Thomas Edison at the Internet Archive
Edison's patent application for the light bulb at the National Archives.
Thomas Edison Personal Manuscripts and Letters
Edison Papers Rutgers.
Edisonian Museum Antique Electrics
Thomas Edison at IMDb
vte
Thomas Edison
vte
General Electric
vte
Telecommunications
vte
Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees
vte
John Fritz Medal
vte
Matteucci Medallists
Portals:
icon Business
icon Engineering
icon Energy
Journalism
flag New Jersey
flag Ohio
icon Science
icon Technology
image History of science
icon Electronics
Film
icon Trains
History
icon Physics
icon Transport
icon Speculative fiction
icon Society
icon Business
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Thomas Edison1847 births1931 deaths19th-century American businesspeople19th-century American inventors20th-century American businesspeople20th-century American inventorsAmerican chief executivesAmerican deaf peopleAmerican deistsAmerican electrical engineersAmerican film production company foundersAmerican film studio executivesAmerican manufacturing businesspeopleAmerican people of Canadian descentAmerican people of Dutch descentAmerican people of English descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican telecommunications engineersAmerican TheosophistsBattery inventorsBurials in New JerseyBusinesspeople from FloridaBusinesspeople from New York CityBusinesspeople from Newark, New JerseyBusinesspeople from OhioAmerican cinema pioneersAmerican scientists with disabilitiesCongressional Gold Medal recipientsDeaths from diabetes in the United StatesDeaf scholars and academicsEdison familyGeneral ElectricGeneral Electric peopleHall of Fame for Great Americans inducteesHonorary Members of the USSR Academy of SciencesInventors from New JerseyInventors from OhioMembers of the Royal Swedish Academy of SciencesMembers of the United States National Academy of SciencesOfficers of the Legion of HonourPeople associated with electricityPeople from Edison, New JerseyPeople from Fort Myers, FloridaPeople from ManhattanPeople from Milan, OhioPeople from West Orange, New JerseyPhonograph manufacturersRecipients of Franklin MedalRecipients of the Matteucci MedalRecipients of the Navy Distinguished Service MedalTelegraph engineers and inventorsMembers of the American Philosophical Society
This page was last edited on 4 September 2024, at 07:48 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki

Main menu
WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Contents hide
(Top)
Early years
Toggle Early years subsection
Working at Edison
Toggle Working at Edison subsection
Tesla Electric Light & Manufacturing
AC and the induction motor
Toggle AC and the induction motor subsection
New York laboratories
Toggle New York laboratories subsection
Wireless power
Toggle Wireless power subsection
Later years
Toggle Later years subsection
Death
Personal life and character
Views and beliefs
Toggle Views and beliefs subsection
Literary works
Legacy and honors
See also
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Nikola Tesla
Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history
Tools
Appearance hide
Text
Small
Standard
Large
Width
Standard
Wide
Color (beta)
Automatic
Light
Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Page semi-protected
Listen to this article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Nikola Tesla (disambiguation).
Nikola Tesla
Никола Тесла
Head-and-shoulder photograph of a slender man with dark hair and moustache, dark suit and white-collar shirt
Tesla, c. 1890
Born	July 10, 1856
Smiljan, Austrian Empire (now Croatia)
Died	January 7, 1943 (aged 86)
New York City, U.S.
Resting place	Nikola Tesla Museum, Belgrade, Serbia
Citizenship	Austria (1856–1891)
United States (1891–1943)
Alma mater	Graz University of Technology (dropped out)
Occupations
Engineerfuturistinventor
Known for
See list:
Awards
Order of St. Sava (1892)
Elliott Cresson Medal (1894)
Order of Prince Danilo I (1895)
IEEE Edison Medal (1916)
Order of the Yugoslav Crown (1931)
John Scott Medal (1934)
Order of the White Eagle (1937)
Order of the White Lion (1937)
Signature
Nikola Tesla (/ˈtɛslə/;[2] Serbian Cyrillic: Никола Тесла, [nǐkola têsla]; 10 July [O.S. 28 June] 1856 – 7 January 1943) was a Serbian-American[3][4] engineer, futurist, and inventor. He is known for his contributions to the design of the modern alternating current (AC) electricity supply system.[5]
Born and raised in the Austrian Empire, Tesla first studied engineering and physics in the 1870s without receiving a degree. He then gained practical experience in the early 1880s working in telephony and at Continental Edison in the new electric power industry. In 1884 he immigrated to the United States, where he became a naturalized citizen. He worked for a short time at the Edison Machine Works in New York City before he struck out on his own. With the help of partners to finance and market his ideas, Tesla set up laboratories and companies in New York to develop a range of electrical and mechanical devices. His AC induction motor and related polyphase AC patents, licensed by Westinghouse Electric in 1888, earned him a considerable amount of money and became the cornerstone of the polyphase system which that company eventually marketed.
Attempting to develop inventions he could patent and market, Tesla conducted a range of experiments with mechanical oscillators/generators, electrical discharge tubes, and early X-ray imaging. He also built a wirelessly controlled boat, one of the first ever exhibited. Tesla became well known as an inventor and demonstrated his achievements to celebrities and wealthy patrons at his lab, and was noted for his showmanship at public lectures. Throughout the 1890s, Tesla pursued his ideas for wireless lighting and worldwide wireless electric power distribution in his high-voltage, high-frequency power experiments in New York and Colorado Springs. In 1893, he made pronouncements on the possibility of wireless communication with his devices. Tesla tried to put these ideas to practical use in his unfinished Wardenclyffe Tower project, an intercontinental wireless communication and power transmitter, but ran out of funding before he could complete it.
After Wardenclyffe, Tesla experimented with a series of inventions in the 1910s and 1920s with varying degrees of success. Having spent most of his money, Tesla lived in a series of New York hotels, leaving behind unpaid bills. He died in New York City in January 1943.[6] Tesla's work fell into relative obscurity following his death, until 1960, when the General Conference on Weights and Measures named the International System of Units (SI) measurement of magnetic flux density the tesla in his honor. There has been a resurgence in popular interest in Tesla since the 1990s.[7]
Early years
Tesla's rebuilt birth house (parish hall) and the church where his father served in Smiljan, Croatia. The site was made into a museum about him.[8]
Nikola Tesla was born into an ethnic Serb family in the village of Smiljan, within the Military Frontier, in the Austrian Empire (present-day Croatia), on 10 July [O.S. 28 June] 1856.[9][10] His father, Milutin Tesla (1819–1879),[11] was a priest of the Eastern Orthodox Church.[12][13][14][15] His father's brother Josif was a lecturer at a military academy who wrote several textbooks on mathematics.[11]
Tesla's mother, Đuka Mandić (1822–1892), whose father was also an Eastern Orthodox Church priest,[16] had a talent for making home craft tools and mechanical appliances and the ability to memorize Serbian epic poems. Đuka had never received a formal education. Tesla credited his eidetic memory and creative abilities to his mother's genetics and influence.[17][18]
Tesla was the fourth of five children. He had three sisters, Milka, Angelina, and Marica, and an older brother named Dane, who was killed in a horse-riding accident when Tesla was aged six or seven.[19] In 1861, Tesla attended primary school in Smiljan where he studied German, arithmetic, and religion. In 1862, the Tesla family moved to the nearby town of Gospić, where Tesla's father worked as parish priest. Nikola completed primary school, followed by middle school. In 1870, Tesla moved to Karlovac[20] to attend high school at the Higher Real Gymnasium where the classes were held in German, as it was usual throughout schools within the Austro-Hungarian Military Frontier.[21][22] Later in his patent applications, before he obtained American citizenship, Tesla would identify himself as 'of Smiljan, Lika, border country of Austria-Hungary'.[23]
Tesla's father, Milutin, was an Orthodox priest in the village of Smiljan.
Tesla later wrote that he became interested in demonstrations of electricity by his physics professor.[a] Tesla noted that these demonstrations of this "mysterious phenomena" made him want "to know more of this wonderful force".[26] Tesla was able to perform integral calculus in his head, which prompted his teachers to believe that he was cheating.[27] He finished a four-year term in three years, graduating in 1873.[28]
After graduating Tesla returned to Smiljan but soon contracted cholera, was bedridden for nine months and was near death multiple times. In a moment of despair, Tesla's father (who had originally wanted him to enter the priesthood),[29] promised to send him to the best engineering school if he recovered from the illness.[30] Tesla later said that he had read Mark Twain's earlier works while recovering from his illness.[31][32]
The next year Tesla evaded conscription into the Austro-Hungarian Army in Smiljan[33] by running away southeast of Lika to Tomingaj, near Gračac. There he explored the mountains wearing hunter's garb. Tesla said that this contact with nature made him stronger, both physically and mentally. He enrolled at the Imperial-Royal Technical College in Graz in 1875 on a Military Frontier scholarship. Tesla passed nine exams (nearly twice as many as required[34]) and received a letter of commendation from the dean of the technical faculty to his father, which stated, "Your son is a star of first rank."[34] At Graz, Tesla noted his fascination with the detailed lectures on electricity presented by Professor Jakob Pöschl and described how he made suggestions on improving the design of an electric motor the professor was demonstrating.[31][better source needed][35] But by his third year he was failing in school and never graduated, leaving Graz in December 1878. One biographer suggests Tesla was not studying and may have been expelled for gambling and womanizing.[36]
Tesla aged 23, c. 1879
Tesla's family did not hear from him after he left school.[37] There was a rumor amongst his classmates that he had drowned in the nearby river Mur but in January one of them ran into Tesla in the town of Maribor and reported that encounter to Tesla's family.[38] It turned out Tesla had been working there as a draftsman for 60 florins per month.[36] In March 1879, Milutin finally located his son and tried to convince him to return home and take up his education in Prague.[38] Tesla returned to Gospić later that month when he was deported for not having a residence permit.[38] Tesla's father died the next month, on 17 April 1879, at the age of 60 after an unspecified illness.[38] During the rest of the year Tesla taught a large class of students in his old school in Gospić.
In January 1880, two of Tesla's uncles put together enough money to help him leave Gospić for Prague, where he was to study. He arrived too late to enroll at Charles-Ferdinand University; he had never studied Greek, a required subject; and he was illiterate in Czech, another required subject. Tesla did, however, attend lectures in philosophy at the university as an auditor but he did not receive grades for the courses.[39][40]
Working at Budapest Telephone Exchange
Tesla moved to Budapest, Hungary, in 1881 to work under Tivadar Puskás at a telegraph company, the Budapest Telephone Exchange. Upon arrival, Tesla realized that the company, then under construction, was not functional, so he worked as a draftsman in the Central Telegraph Office instead. Within a few months, the Budapest Telephone Exchange became functional, and Tesla was allocated the chief electrician position. During his employment, Tesla made many improvements to the Central Station equipment and claimed to have perfected a telephone repeater or amplifier, which was never patented nor publicly described.[31][better source needed]
Working at Edison
In 1882, Tivadar Puskás got Tesla another job in Paris with the Continental Edison Company.[41] Tesla began working in what was then a brand new industry, installing indoor incandescent lighting citywide in large scale electric power utility. The company had several subdivisions and Tesla worked at the Société Electrique Edison, the division in the Ivry-sur-Seine suburb of Paris in charge of installing the lighting system. There he gained a great deal of practical experience in electrical engineering. Management took notice of his advanced knowledge in engineering and physics and soon had him designing and building improved versions of generating dynamos and motors.[42] They also sent him on to troubleshoot engineering problems at other Edison utilities being built around France and in Germany.
Moving to the United States
Edison Machine Works on Goerck Street, New York. Tesla found the change from cosmopolitan Europe to working at this shop, located amongst the tenements on Manhattan's lower east side, a "painful surprise".[43]
In 1884, Edison manager Charles Batchelor, who had been overseeing the Paris installation, was brought back to the United States to manage the Edison Machine Works, a manufacturing division situated in New York City, and asked that Tesla be brought to the United States as well.[44] In June 1884, Tesla emigrated[45] and began working almost immediately at the Machine Works on Manhattan's Lower East Side, an overcrowded shop with a workforce of several hundred machinists, laborers, managing staff, and 20 "field engineers" struggling with the task of building the large electric utility in that city.[46] As in Paris, Tesla was working on troubleshooting installations and improving generators.[47] Historian W. Bernard Carlson notes Tesla may have met company founder Thomas Edison only a couple of times.[46] One of those times was noted in Tesla's autobiography where, after staying up all night repairing the damaged dynamos on the ocean liner SS Oregon, he ran into Batchelor and Edison, who made a quip about their "Parisian" being out all night. After Tesla told them he had been up all night fixing the Oregon, Edison commented to Batchelor that "this is a damned good man".[43] One of the projects given to Tesla was to develop an arc lamp-based street lighting system.[48][49] Arc lighting was the most popular type of street lighting but it required high voltages and was incompatible with the Edison low-voltage incandescent system, causing the company to lose contracts in some cities. Tesla's designs were never put into production, possibly because of technical improvements in incandescent street lighting or because of an installation deal that Edison made with an arc lighting company.[50]
Tesla had been working at the Machine Works for a total of six months when he quit.[46] What event precipitated his leaving is unclear. It may have been over a bonus he did not receive, either for redesigning generators or for the arc lighting system that was shelved.[48] Tesla had previous run-ins with the Edison company over unpaid bonuses he believed he had earned.[51][52] In his autobiography, Tesla stated the manager of the Edison Machine Works offered a $50,000 bonus to design "twenty-four different types of standard machines" "but it turned out to be a practical joke".[53][better source needed] Later versions of this story have Thomas Edison himself offering and then reneging on the deal, quipping "Tesla, you don't understand our American humor".[54][55] The size of the bonus in either story has been noted as odd since Machine Works manager Batchelor was stingy with pay[b] and the company did not have that amount of cash (equal to $1,695,556 today) on hand.[57][58] Tesla's diary contains just one comment on what happened at the end of his employment, a note he scrawled across the two pages covering 7 December 1884, to 4 January 1885, saying "Good By to the Edison Machine Works".[49][59]
Tesla Electric Light & Manufacturing
Soon after leaving the Edison company, Tesla was working on patenting an arc lighting system,[60] possibly the same one he had developed at Edison.[46] In March 1885, he met with patent attorney Lemuel W. Serrell, the same attorney used by Edison, to obtain help with submitting the patents.[60] Serrell introduced Tesla to two businessmen, Robert Lane and Benjamin Vail, who agreed to finance an arc lighting manufacturing and utility company in Tesla's name, the Tesla Electric Light and Manufacturing Company.[61] Tesla worked for the rest of the year obtaining the patents that included an improved DC generator, the first patents issued to Tesla in the US, and building and installing the system in Rahway, New Jersey.[62] Tesla's new system gained notice in the technical press, which commented on its advanced features.
The investors showed little interest in Tesla's ideas for new types of alternating current motors and electrical transmission equipment. After the utility was up and running in 1886, they decided that the manufacturing side of the business was too competitive and opted to simply run an electric utility.[63] They formed a new utility company, abandoning Tesla's company and leaving the inventor penniless.[63] Tesla even lost control of the patents he had generated, since he had assigned them to the company in exchange for stock.[63] He had to work at various electrical repair jobs and as a ditch digger for $2 per day. Later in life Tesla recounted that part of 1886 as a time of hardship, writing "My high education in various branches of science, mechanics and literature seemed to me like a mockery".[63][c]
AC and the induction motor
Drawing from U.S. patent 381,968, illustrating the principle of Tesla's alternating current induction motor
In late 1886, Tesla met Alfred S. Brown, a Western Union superintendent, and New York attorney Charles Fletcher Peck.[65] The two men were experienced in setting up companies and promoting inventions and patents for financial gain.[66] Based on Tesla's new ideas for electrical equipment, including a thermo-magnetic motor idea,[67] they agreed to back the inventor financially and handle his patents. Together they formed the Tesla Electric Company in April 1887, with an agreement that profits from generated patents would go 1⁄3 to Tesla, 1⁄3 to Peck and Brown, and 1⁄3 to fund development.[66] They set up a laboratory for Tesla at 89 Liberty Street in Manhattan, where he worked on improving and developing new types of electric motors, generators, and other devices.
In 1887, Tesla developed an induction motor that ran on alternating current (AC), a power system format that was rapidly expanding in Europe and the United States because of its advantages in long-distance, high-voltage transmission. The motor used polyphase current, which generated a rotating magnetic field to turn the motor (a principle that Tesla claimed to have conceived in 1882).[68][69][70] This innovative electric motor, patented in May 1888, was a simple self-starting design that did not need a commutator, thus avoiding sparking and the high maintenance of constantly servicing and replacing mechanical brushes.[71][72]
Along with getting the motor patented, Peck and Brown arranged to get the motor publicized, starting with independent testing to verify it was a functional improvement, followed by press releases sent to technical publications for articles to run concurrently with the issue of the patent.[73] Physicist William Arnold Anthony (who tested the motor) and Electrical World magazine editor Thomas Commerford Martin arranged for Tesla to demonstrate his AC motor on 16 May 1888 at the American Institute of Electrical Engineers.[73][74] Engineers working for the Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company reported to George Westinghouse that Tesla had a viable AC motor and related power system—something Westinghouse needed for the alternating current system he was already marketing. Westinghouse looked into getting a patent on a similar commutator-less, rotating magnetic field-based induction motor developed in 1885 and presented in a paper in March 1888 by Italian physicist Galileo Ferraris, but decided that Tesla's patent would probably control the market.[75][76]
Tesla's AC dynamo-electric machine (AC electric generator) in an 1888 U.S. patent 390,721
In July 1888, Brown and Peck negotiated a licensing deal with George Westinghouse for Tesla's polyphase induction motor and transformer designs for $60,000 in cash and stock and a royalty of $2.50 per AC horsepower produced by each motor. Westinghouse also hired Tesla for one year for the large fee of $2,000 ($67,800 in today's dollars[77]) per month to be a consultant at the Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company's Pittsburgh labs.[78]
During that year, Tesla worked in Pittsburgh, helping to create an alternating current system to power the city's streetcars. He found it a frustrating period because of conflicts with the other Westinghouse engineers over how best to implement AC power. Between them, they settled on a 60-cycle AC system that Tesla proposed (to match the working frequency of Tesla's motor), but they soon found that it would not work for streetcars, since Tesla's induction motor could run only at a constant speed. They ended up using a DC traction motor instead.[79][80]
Market turmoil
Tesla's demonstration of his induction motor and Westinghouse's subsequent licensing of the patent, both in 1888, came at the time of extreme competition between electric companies.[81][82] The three big firms, Westinghouse, Edison, and Thomson-Houston Electric Company, were trying to grow in a capital-intensive business while financially undercutting each other. There was even a "war of currents" propaganda campaign going on, with Edison Electric claiming their direct current system was better and safer than the Westinghouse alternating current system and Thomson-Houston sometimes siding with Edison.[83][84] Competing in this market meant Westinghouse would not have the cash or engineering resources to develop Tesla's motor and the related polyphase system right away.[85]
Two years after signing the Tesla contract, Westinghouse Electric was in trouble. The near collapse of Barings Bank in London triggered the financial panic of 1890, causing investors to call in their loans to Westinghouse Electric.[86] The sudden cash shortage forced the company to refinance its debts. The new lenders demanded that Westinghouse cut back on what looked like excessive spending on acquisition of other companies, research, and patents, including the per motor royalty in the Tesla contract.[87][88] At that point, the Tesla induction motor had been unsuccessful and was stuck in development.[85][86] Westinghouse was paying a $15,000-a-year guaranteed royalty[89] even though operating examples of the motor were rare and polyphase power systems needed to run it was even rarer.[71][86] In early 1891, George Westinghouse explained his financial difficulties to Tesla in stark terms, saying that, if he did not meet the demands of his lenders, he would no longer be in control of Westinghouse Electric and Tesla would have to "deal with the bankers" to try to collect future royalties.[90] The advantages of having Westinghouse continue to champion the motor probably seemed obvious to Tesla and he agreed to release the company from the royalty payment clause in the contract.[90][91] Six years later Westinghouse purchased Tesla's patent for a lump sum payment of $216,000 as part of a patent-sharing agreement signed with General Electric (a company created from the 1892 merger of Edison and Thomson-Houston).[92][93][94]
New York laboratories
Mark Twain in Tesla's lab, 1894
Mark Twain in Tesla's South Fifth Avenue laboratory, 1894
The money Tesla made from licensing his AC patents made him independently wealthy and gave him the time and funds to pursue his own interests.[95] In 1889, Tesla moved out of the Liberty Street shop Peck and Brown had rented and for the next dozen years worked out of a series of workshop/laboratory spaces in Manhattan. These included a lab at 175 Grand Street (1889–1892), the fourth floor of 33–35 South Fifth Avenue (1892–1895), and sixth and seventh floors of 46 & 48 East Houston Street (1895–1902).[96][97] Tesla and his hired staff conducted some of his most significant work in these workshops.
Tesla coil
Main article: Tesla coil
In the summer of 1889, Tesla traveled to the 1889 Exposition Universelle in Paris and learned of Heinrich Hertz's 1886–1888 experiments that proved the existence of electromagnetic radiation, including radio waves.[98] In repeating and then expanding on these experiments Tesla tried powering a Ruhmkorff coil with a high speed alternator he had been developing as part of an improved arc lighting system but found that the high-frequency current overheated the iron core and melted the insulation between the primary and secondary windings in the coil. To fix this problem Tesla came up with his "oscillating transformer", with an air gap instead of insulating material between the primary and secondary windings and an iron core that could be moved to different positions in or out of the coil.[99] Later called the Tesla coil, it would be used to produce high-voltage, low-current, high frequency alternating-current electricity.[100] He would use this resonant transformer circuit in his later wireless power work.[101][102]
Citizenship
On 30 July 1891, aged 35, Tesla became a naturalized citizen of the United States.[103][104] In the same year, he patented his Tesla coil.[105]
Wireless lighting
Tesla demonstrating wireless lighting by "electrostatic induction" during an 1891 lecture at Columbia College via two long Geissler tubes (similar to neon tubes) in his hands
After 1890, Tesla experimented with transmitting power by inductive and capacitive coupling using high AC voltages generated with his Tesla coil.[106] He attempted to develop a wireless lighting system based on near-field inductive and capacitive coupling and conducted a series of public demonstrations where he lit Geissler tubes and even incandescent light bulbs from across a stage.[107] He spent most of the decade working on variations of this new form of lighting with the help of various investors but none of the ventures succeeded in making a commercial product out of his findings.[108]
In 1893 at St. Louis, Missouri, the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the National Electric Light Association, Tesla told onlookers that he was sure a system like his could eventually conduct "intelligible signals or perhaps even power to any distance without the use of wires" by conducting it through the Earth.[109][110]
Tesla served as a vice-president of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers from 1892 to 1894, the forerunner of the modern-day IEEE (along with the Institute of Radio Engineers).[111]
Polyphase system and the Columbian Exposition
A Westinghouse display of the "Tesla Polyphase System" at Chicago's 1893 Columbian Exposition
By the beginning of 1893, Westinghouse engineer Charles F. Scott and then Benjamin G. Lamme had made progress on an efficient version of Tesla's induction motor. Lamme found a way to make the polyphase system it would need compatible with older single-phase AC and DC systems by developing a rotary converter.[112] Westinghouse Electric now had a way to provide electricity to all potential customers and started branding their polyphase AC system as the "Tesla Polyphase System". They believed that Tesla's patents gave them patent priority over other polyphase AC systems.[113]
Westinghouse Electric asked Tesla to participate in the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago where the company had a large space in the "Electricity Building" devoted to electrical exhibits. Westinghouse Electric won the bid to light the Exposition with alternating current and it was a key event in the history of AC power, as the company demonstrated to the American public the safety, reliability, and efficiency of an alternating current system that was polyphase and could also supply the other AC and DC exhibits at the fair.[114][115][116]
A special exhibit space was set up to display various forms and models of Tesla's induction motor. The rotating magnetic field that drove them was explained through a series of demonstrations including an Egg of Columbus that used the two-phase coil found in an induction motor to spin a copper egg making it stand on end.[117]
Tesla visited the fair for a week during its six-month run to attend the International Electrical Congress and put on a series of demonstrations at the Westinghouse exhibit.[118][119] A specially darkened room had been set up where Tesla showed his wireless lighting system, using a demonstration he had previously performed throughout America and Europe;[120] these included using high-voltage, high-frequency alternating current to light wireless gas-discharge lamps.[121]
An observer noted:
Within the room were suspended two hard-rubber plates covered with tin foil. These were about fifteen feet apart and served as terminals of the wires leading from the transformers. When the current was turned on, the lamps or tubes, which had no wires connected to them, but lay on a table between the suspended plates, or which might be held in the hand in almost any part of the room, were made luminous. These were the same experiments and the same apparatus shown by Tesla in London about two years previous, "where they produced so much wonder and astonishment".[122]
Steam-powered oscillating generator
Main article: Tesla's oscillator
During his presentation at the International Electrical Congress in the Columbian Exposition Agriculture Hall, Tesla introduced his steam powered reciprocating electricity generator that he patented that year, something he thought was a better way to generate alternating current.[123] Steam was forced into the oscillator and rushed out through a series of ports, pushing a piston up and down that was attached to an armature. The magnetic armature vibrated up and down at high speed, producing an alternating magnetic field. This induced alternating electric current in the wire coils located adjacent. It did away with the complicated parts of a steam engine/generator, but never caught on as a feasible engineering solution to generate electricity.[124][125]
Consulting on Niagara
In 1893, Edward Dean Adams, who headed the Niagara Falls Cataract Construction Company, sought Tesla's opinion on what system would be best to transmit power generated at the falls. Over several years, there had been a series of proposals and open competitions on how best to do it. Among the systems proposed by several US and European companies were two-phase and three-phase AC, high-voltage DC, and compressed air. Adams asked Tesla for information about the current state of all the competing systems. Tesla advised Adams that a two-phased system would be the most reliable and that there was a Westinghouse system to light incandescent bulbs using two-phase alternating current. The company awarded a contract to Westinghouse Electric for building a two-phase AC generating system at the Niagara Falls, based on Tesla's advice and Westinghouse's demonstration at the Columbian Exposition. At the same time, a further contract was awarded to General Electric to build the AC distribution system.[126]
The Nikola Tesla Company
In 1895, Edward Dean Adams, impressed with what he saw when he toured Tesla's lab, agreed to help found the Nikola Tesla Company, set up to fund, develop, and market a variety of previous Tesla patents and inventions as well as new ones. Alfred Brown signed on, bringing along patents developed under Peck and Brown. The board was filled out with William Birch Rankine and Charles F. Coaney.[127] It found few investors since the mid-1890s were a tough time financially, and the wireless lighting and oscillators patents it was set up to market never panned out. The company handled Tesla's patents for decades to come.
Lab fire
In the early morning hours of 13 March 1895, the South Fifth Avenue building that housed Tesla's lab caught fire. It started in the basement of the building and was so intense Tesla's 4th-floor lab burned and collapsed into the second floor. The fire not only set back Tesla's ongoing projects, but it also destroyed a collection of early notes and research material, models, and demonstration pieces, including many that had been exhibited at the 1893 Worlds Colombian Exposition. Tesla told The New York Times "I am in too much grief to talk. What can I say?".[128] After the fire Tesla moved to 46 & 48 East Houston Street and rebuilt his lab on the 6th and 7th floors.
X-ray experimentation
X-ray Tesla took of his hand
Starting in 1894, Tesla began investigating what he referred to as radiant energy of "invisible" kinds after he had noticed damaged film in his laboratory in previous experiments[129] (later identified as "Roentgen rays" or "X-rays"). His early experiments were with Crookes tubes, a cold cathode electrical discharge tube. Tesla may have inadvertently captured an X-ray image—predating, by a few weeks, Wilhelm Röntgen's December 1895 announcement of the discovery of X-rays—when he tried to photograph Mark Twain illuminated by a Geissler tube, an earlier type of gas discharge tube. The only thing captured in the image was the metal locking screw on the camera lens.[130]
In March 1896, after hearing of Röntgen's discovery of X-ray and X-ray imaging (radiography),[131] Tesla proceeded to do his own experiments in X-ray imaging, developing a high-energy single-terminal vacuum tube of his own design that had no target electrode and that worked from the output of the Tesla coil (the modern term for the phenomenon produced by this device is bremsstrahlung or braking radiation). In his research, Tesla devised several experimental setups to produce X-rays. Tesla held that, with his circuits, the "instrument will ... enable one to generate Roentgen rays of much greater power than obtainable with ordinary apparatus".[132]
Tesla noted the hazards of working with his circuit and single-node X-ray-producing devices. In his many notes on the early investigation of this phenomenon, he attributed the skin damage to various causes. He believed early on that damage to the skin was not caused by the Roentgen rays, but by the ozone generated in contact with the skin, and to a lesser extent, by nitrous acid. Tesla incorrectly believed that X-rays were longitudinal waves, such as those produced in waves in plasmas. These plasma waves can occur in force-free magnetic fields.[133][134]
On 11 July 1934, the New York Herald Tribune published an article on Tesla, in which he recalled an event that occasionally took place while experimenting with his single-electrode vacuum tubes. A minute particle would break off the cathode, pass out of the tube, and physically strike him:[135]
Tesla said he could feel a sharp stinging pain where it entered his body, and again at the place where it passed out. In comparing these particles with the bits of metal projected by his "electric gun", Tesla said, "The particles in the beam of force ... will travel much faster than such particles ... and they will travel in concentrations".
Radio remote control
In 1898, Tesla demonstrated a radio-controlled boat, which he hoped to sell as a guided torpedo to navies around the world.[136]
In 1898, Tesla demonstrated a boat that used a coherer-based radio control—which he dubbed "telautomaton"—to the public during an electrical exhibition at Madison Square Garden.[137] Tesla tried to sell his idea to the US military as a type of radio-controlled torpedo, but they showed little interest.[138] Remote radio control remained a novelty until World War I and afterward, when a number of countries used it in military programs.[139] Tesla took the opportunity to further demonstrate "Teleautomatics" in an address to a meeting of the Commercial Club in Chicago, while he was travelling to Colorado Springs, on 13 May 1899.
Wireless power
Further information: Wireless power transfer § Tesla
Tesla sitting in front of a spiral coil used in his wireless power experiments at his East Houston St. laboratory
From the 1890s through 1906, Tesla spent a great deal of his time and fortune on a series of projects trying to develop the transmission of electrical power without wires. It was an expansion of his idea of using coils to transmit power that he had been demonstrating in wireless lighting. He saw this as not only a way to transmit large amounts of power around the world but also, as he had pointed out in his earlier lectures, a way to transmit worldwide communications.
At the time Tesla was formulating his ideas, there was no feasible way to wirelessly transmit communication signals over long distances, let alone large amounts of power. Tesla had studied radio waves early on, and came to the conclusion that part of the existing study on them, by Hertz, was incorrect.[140][141][142] Also, this new form of radiation was widely considered at the time to be a short-distance phenomenon that seemed to die out in less than a mile.[143] Tesla noted that, even if theories on radio waves were true, they were totally worthless for his intended purposes since this form of "invisible light" would diminish over a distance just like any other radiation and would travel in straight lines right out into space, becoming "hopelessly lost".[144]
By the mid-1890s, Tesla was working on the idea that he might be able to conduct electricity long distance through the Earth or the atmosphere, and began working on experiments to test this idea including setting up a large resonance transformer magnifying transmitter in his East Houston Street lab.[145][146][147] Seeming to borrow from a common idea at the time that the Earth's atmosphere was conductive,[148][149] he proposed a system composed of balloons suspending, transmitting, and receiving, electrodes in the air above 30,000 feet (9,100 m) in altitude, where he thought the lower pressure would allow him to send high voltages (millions of volts) long distances.
Colorado Springs
See also: Tesla Experimental Station; Magnifying transmitter; and Colorado Springs Notes, 1899–1900
Tesla's Colorado Springs laboratory
To further study the conductive nature of low-pressure air, Tesla set up an experimental station at high altitude in Colorado Springs during 1899.[150][151][152][153] There he could safely operate much larger coils than in the cramped confines of his New York lab, and an associate had made an arrangement for the El Paso Electric Light Company to supply alternating current free of charge.[153] To fund his experiments, he convinced John Jacob Astor IV to invest $100,000 ($3,662,400 in today's dollars[77]) to become a majority shareholder in the Nikola Tesla Company. Astor thought he was primarily investing in the new wireless lighting system. Instead, Tesla used the money to fund his Colorado Springs experiments.[154] Upon his arrival, he told reporters that he planned to conduct wireless telegraphy experiments, transmitting signals from Pikes Peak to Paris.[155]
A multiple exposure picture of Tesla sitting next to his "magnifying transmitter" generating millions of volts. The 7-metre (23 ft) long arcs were not part of the normal operation, but only produced for effect by rapidly cycling the power switch.[156]
There, he conducted experiments with a large coil operating in the megavolts range, producing artificial lightning (and thunder) consisting of millions of volts and discharges of up to 135 feet (41 m) in length,[157] and, at one point, inadvertently burned out the generator in El Paso, causing a power outage.[158] The observations he made of the electronic noise of lightning strikes led him to (incorrectly) conclude[159][160] that he could use the entire globe of the Earth to conduct electrical energy.
During his time at his laboratory, Tesla observed unusual signals from his receiver which he speculated to be communications from another planet. He mentioned them in a letter to a reporter in December 1899[161] and to the Red Cross Society in December 1900.[162][163] Reporters treated it as a sensational story and jumped to the conclusion Tesla was hearing signals from Mars.[162] He expanded on the signals he heard in a 9 February 1901 Collier's Weekly article entitled "Talking With Planets", where he said it had not been immediately apparent to him that he was hearing "intelligently controlled signals" and that the signals could have come from Mars, Venus, or other planets.[163] It has been hypothesized that he may have intercepted Guglielmo Marconi's European experiments in July 1899—Marconi may have transmitted the letter S (dot/dot/dot) in a naval demonstration, the same three impulses that Tesla hinted at hearing in Colorado[163]—or signals from another experimenter in wireless transmission.[164][unreliable source?]
Tesla had an agreement with the editor of The Century Magazine to produce an article on his findings. The magazine sent a photographer to Colorado to photograph the work being done there. The article, titled "The Problem of Increasing Human Energy", appeared in the June 1900 edition of the magazine. He explained the superiority of the wireless system he envisioned but the article was more of a lengthy philosophical treatise than an understandable scientific description of his work,[165] illustrated with what were to become iconic images of Tesla and his Colorado Springs experiments.
Wardenclyffe
Main article: Wardenclyffe Tower
Tesla's Wardenclyffe plant on Long Island in 1904. From this facility, Tesla hoped to demonstrate wireless transmission of electrical energy across the Atlantic.
Tesla made the rounds in New York trying to find investors for what he thought would be a viable system of wireless transmission, wining and dining them at the Waldorf-Astoria's Palm Garden (the hotel where he was living at the time), The Players Club, and Delmonico's.[166] In March 1901, he obtained $150,000 ($5,493,600 in today's dollars[77]) from J. P. Morgan in return for a 51% share of any generated wireless patents, and began planning the Wardenclyffe Tower facility to be built in Shoreham, New York, 100 miles (161 km) east of the city on the North Shore of Long Island.[167]
By July 1901, Tesla had expanded his plans to build a more powerful transmitter to leap ahead of Marconi's radio-based system, which Tesla thought was a copy of his own.[162] He approached Morgan to ask for more money to build the larger system, but Morgan refused to supply any further funds.[164][unreliable source?] In December 1901, Marconi successfully transmitted the letter S from England to Newfoundland, defeating Tesla in the race to be first to complete such a transmission. A month after Marconi's success, Tesla tried to get Morgan to back an even larger plan to transmit messages and power by controlling "vibrations throughout the globe".[162] Over the next five years, Tesla wrote more than 50 letters to Morgan, pleading for and demanding additional funding to complete the construction of Wardenclyffe. Tesla continued the project for another nine months into 1902. The tower was erected to its full height of 187 feet (57 m).[164][unreliable source?] In June 1902, Tesla moved his lab operations from Houston Street to Wardenclyffe.[167]
Investors on Wall Street were putting their money into Marconi's system, and some in the press began turning against Tesla's project, claiming it was a hoax.[168] The project came to a halt in 1905, and in 1906, the financial problems and other events may have led to what Tesla biographer Marc J. Seifer suspects was a nervous breakdown on Tesla's part.[169] Tesla mortgaged the Wardenclyffe property to cover his debts at the Waldorf-Astoria, which eventually amounted to $20,000 ($608,400 in today's dollars[77]).[170] He lost the property in foreclosure in 1915, and in 1917 the Tower was demolished by the new owner to make the land a more viable real estate asset.
Later years
After Wardenclyffe closed, Tesla continued to write to Morgan; after "the great man" died, Tesla wrote to Morgan's son Jack, trying to get further funding for the project. In 1906, Tesla opened offices at 165 Broadway in Manhattan, trying to raise further funds by developing and marketing his patents. He went on to have offices at the Metropolitan Life Tower from 1910 to 1914; rented for a few months at the Woolworth Building, moving out because he could not afford the rent; and then to office space at 8 West 40th Street from 1915 to 1925. After moving to 8 West 40th Street, he was effectively bankrupt. Most of his patents had run out and he was having trouble with the new inventions he was trying to develop.[171]
Bladeless turbine
Main article: Tesla turbine
Tesla's bladeless turbine design
On his 50th birthday, in 1906, Tesla demonstrated a 200 horsepower (150 kilowatts) 16,000 rpm bladeless turbine. During 1910–1911, at the Waterside Power Station in New York, several of his bladeless turbine engines were tested at 100–5,000 hp.[172] Tesla worked with several companies including from 1919 to 1922 in Milwaukee, for Allis-Chalmers.[173][174] He spent most of his time trying to perfect the Tesla turbine with Hans Dahlstrand, the head engineer at the company, but engineering difficulties meant it was never made into a practical device.[175][page needed] Tesla did license the idea to a precision instrument company and it found use in the form of luxury car speedometers and other instruments.[176]
Wireless lawsuits
When World War I broke out, the British cut the transatlantic telegraph cable linking the US to Germany in order to control the flow of information between the two countries. They also tried to shut off German wireless communication to and from the US by having the US Marconi Company sue the German radio company Telefunken for patent infringement.[177] Telefunken brought in the physicists Jonathan Zenneck and Karl Ferdinand Braun for their defense, and hired Tesla as a witness for two years for $1,000 a month. The case stalled and then went moot when the US entered the war against Germany in 1917.[177][178]
In 1915, Tesla attempted to sue the Marconi Company for infringement of his wireless tuning patents. Marconi's initial radio patent had been awarded in the US in 1897, but his 1900 patent submission covering improvements to radio transmission had been rejected several times, before it was finally approved in 1904, on the grounds that it infringed on other existing patents including two 1897 Tesla wireless power tuning patents.[141][179][180] Tesla's 1915 case went nowhere,[181] but in a related case, where the Marconi Company tried to sue the US government over WWI patent infringements, a Supreme Court of the United States 1943 decision restored the prior patents of Oliver Lodge, John Stone, and Tesla.[182] The court declared that their decision had no bearing on Marconi's claim as the first to achieve radio transmission, just that since Marconi's claim to certain patented improvements were questionable, the company could not claim infringement on those same patents.[141][183]
Nobel Prize rumors
On 6 November 1915, a Reuters news agency report from London had the 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics awarded to Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla; however, on 15 November, a Reuters story from Stockholm stated the prize that year was being awarded to William Henry Bragg and Lawrence Bragg "for their services in the analysis of crystal structure by means of X-rays".[184][185][186] There were unsubstantiated rumors at the time that either Tesla or Edison had refused the prize.[184] The Nobel Foundation said, "Any rumor that a person has not been given a Nobel Prize because he has made known his intention to refuse the reward is ridiculous"; a recipient could decline a Nobel Prize only after he is announced a winner.[184]
There have been subsequent claims by Tesla biographers that Edison and Tesla were the original recipients and that neither was given the award because of their animosity toward each other; that each sought to minimize the other's achievements and right to win the award; that both refused ever to accept the award if the other received it first; that both rejected any possibility of sharing it; and even that a wealthy Edison refused it to keep Tesla from getting the $20,000 prize money.[18][184]
In the years after these rumors, neither Tesla nor Edison won a Nobel prize (although Edison received one of 38 possible bids in 1915 and Tesla received one of 38 possible bids in 1937).[187]
Other awards, patents and ideas
Tesla won numerous medals and awards over this time. They include:
Grand Officer of the Order of St. Sava (Serbia, 1892)
Elliott Cresson Medal (Franklin Institute, USA, 1894)[188]
Grand Cross of the Order of Prince Danilo I (Montenegro, 1895)[189]
Member of the American Philosophical Society (USA, 1896)[190]
AIEE Edison Medal (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, USA, 1916)[191]
Grand Cross of the Order of St. Sava (Yugoslavia, 1926)[192]
Cross of the Order of the Yugoslav Crown (Yugoslavia, 1931)
John Scott Medal (Franklin Institute & Philadelphia City Council, USA, 1934)[188]
Order of the White Eagle (Yugoslavia, 1936)
Grand Cross of the Order of the White Lion (Czechoslovakia, 1937)[193]
Medal of the University of Paris (Paris, France, 1937)
The Medal of the University St. Clement of Ochrida (Sofia, Bulgaria, 1939)
Second banquet meeting of the Institute of Radio Engineers, 23 April 1915. Tesla is seen standing in the center.
Tesla attempted to market several devices based on the production of ozone. These included his 1900 Tesla Ozone Company selling an 1896 patented device based on his Tesla coil, used to bubble ozone through different types of oils to make a therapeutic gel.[194] He also tried to develop a variation of this a few years later as a room sanitizer for hospitals.[195]
Tesla theorized that the application of electricity to the brain enhanced intelligence. In 1912, he crafted "a plan to make dull students bright by saturating them unconsciously with electricity," wiring the walls of a schoolroom and, "saturating [the schoolroom] with infinitesimal electric waves vibrating at high frequency. The whole room will thus, Mr. Tesla claims, be converted into a health-giving and stimulating electromagnetic field or 'bath.'"[196] The plan was, at least provisionally, approved by then superintendent of New York City schools, William H. Maxwell.[196]
Before World War I, Tesla sought overseas investors. After the war started, Tesla lost the funding he was receiving from his patents in European countries.
In the August 1917 edition of the magazine Electrical Experimenter, Tesla postulated that electricity could be used to locate submarines via using the reflection of an "electric ray" of "tremendous frequency," with the signal being viewed on a fluorescent screen (a system that has been noted to have a superficial resemblance to modern radar).[197] Tesla was incorrect in his assumption that high-frequency radio waves would penetrate water.[198] Émile Girardeau, who helped develop France's first radar system in the 1930s, noted in 1953 that Tesla's general speculation that a very strong high-frequency signal would be needed was correct. Girardeau said, "(Tesla) was prophesying or dreaming, since he had at his disposal no means of carrying them out, but one must add that if he was dreaming, at least he was dreaming correctly".[199]
In 1928, Tesla received patent, U.S. patent 1,655,114, for a biplane design capable of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL), which "gradually tilted through manipulation of the elevator devices" in flight until it was flying like a conventional plane.[200] This impractical design was something Tesla thought would sell for less than $1,000.[201][202]
Tesla had a further office at 350 Madison Ave[203] but by 1928 he no longer had a laboratory or funding.[202]
Living circumstances
Tesla lived at the Waldorf Astoria in New York City from 1900 and ran up a large bill.[204] He moved to the St. Regis Hotel in 1922 and followed a pattern from then on of moving to a different hotel every few years and leaving unpaid bills behind.[205][206]
Tesla walked to the park every day to feed the pigeons. He began feeding them at the window of his hotel room and nursed injured birds back to health.[206][207][208] He said that he had been visited by a certain injured white pigeon daily. He spent over $2,000 (equivalent to $36,410 in 2023) to care for the bird, including a device he built to support her comfortably while her broken wing and leg healed.[209] Tesla stated:
I have been feeding pigeons, thousands of them for years. But there was one, a beautiful bird, pure white with light grey tips on its wings; that one was different. It was a female. I had only to wish and call her and she would come flying to me. I loved that pigeon as a man loves a woman, and she loved me. As long as I had her, there was a purpose to my life.[210]
Tesla's unpaid bills, as well as complaints about the mess made by pigeons, led to his eviction from St. Regis in 1923. He was also forced to leave the Hotel Pennsylvania in 1930 and the Hotel Governor Clinton in 1934.[206] At one point he also took rooms at the Hotel Marguery.[211]
Tesla moved to the Hotel New Yorker in 1934. At this time Westinghouse Electric & Manufacturing Company began paying him $125 (equivalent to $2,850 in 2023) per month in addition to paying his rent. Accounts of how this came about vary. Several sources claim that Westinghouse was concerned, or possibly warned, about potential bad publicity arising from the impoverished conditions in which their former star inventor was living.[212][213][214][215] The payment has been described as being couched as a "consulting fee" to get around Tesla's aversion to accepting charity. Tesla biographer Marc Seifer described the Westinghouse payments as a type of "unspecified settlement".[214]
Birthday press conferences
Tesla on Time magazine commemorating his 75th birthday
In 1931, a young journalist whom Tesla befriended, Kenneth M. Swezey, organized a celebration for the inventor's 75th birthday.[216] Tesla received congratulations from figures in science and engineering such as Albert Einstein,[217] and he was also featured on the cover of Time magazine.[218] The cover caption "All the world's his power house" noted his contribution to electrical power generation. The party went so well that Tesla made it an annual event, an occasion where he would put out a large spread of food and drink—featuring dishes of his own creation. He invited the press in order to see his inventions and hear stories about his past exploits, views on current events, and sometimes baffling claims.[219][220]
Newspaper representation of the thought camera Tesla described at his 1933 birthday party
At the 1932 party, Tesla claimed he had invented a motor that would run on cosmic rays.[220] In 1933, at age 77, Tesla told reporters at the event that, after 35 years of work, he was on the verge of producing proof of a new form of energy. He claimed it was a theory of energy that was "violently opposed" to Einsteinian physics and could be tapped with an apparatus that would be cheap to run and last 500 years. He also told reporters he was working on a way to transmit individualized private radio wavelengths, working on breakthroughs in metallurgy, and developing a way to photograph the retina to record thought.[221]
At the 1934 occasion, Tesla told reporters he had designed a superweapon he claimed would end all war.[222][223] He called it "teleforce", but was usually referred to as his death ray.[224] In 1940, the New York Times gave a range for the ray of 250 miles (400 km), with an expected development cost of US$2 million (equivalent to $43.5 million in 2023).[225] Tesla described it as a defensive weapon that would be put up along the border of a country and be used against attacking ground-based infantry or aircraft. Tesla never revealed detailed plans of how the weapon worked during his lifetime but, in 1984, they surfaced at the Nikola Tesla Museum archive in Belgrade.[226] The treatise, The New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive Energy through the Natural Media, described an open-ended vacuum tube with a gas jet seal that allows particles to exit, a method of charging slugs of tungsten or mercury to millions of volts, and directing them in streams (through electrostatic repulsion).[220][227] Tesla tried to attract interest of the US War Department,[228] United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia in the device.[229]
In 1935, at his 79th birthday party, Tesla covered many topics. He claimed to have discovered the cosmic ray in 1896 and invented a way to produce direct current by induction, and made many claims about his mechanical oscillator.[230] Describing the device (which he expected would earn him $100 million within two years) he told reporters that a version of his oscillator had caused an earthquake in his 46 East Houston Street lab and neighboring streets in Lower Manhattan in 1898.[230] He went on to tell reporters his oscillator could destroy the Empire State Building with 5 pounds (2.3 kg) of air pressure.[231] He also proposed using his oscillators to transmit vibrations into the ground. He claimed it would work over any distance and could be used for communication or locating underground mineral deposits, a technique he called "telegeodynamics".[135]
In 1937, at his Grand Ballroom of Hotel New Yorker event, Tesla received the Order of the White Lion from the Czechoslovak ambassador and a medal from the Yugoslav ambassador. On questions concerning the death ray, Tesla stated: "But it is not an experiment ... I have built, demonstrated and used it. Only a little time will pass before I can give it to the world."[220]
Death
Room 3327 of the Hotel New Yorker, where Tesla died
Room 3327 of the Hotel New Yorker, where Tesla died
Commemorative plaque, New Yorker Hotel
In the fall of 1937 at the age of 81, after midnight one night, Tesla left the Hotel New Yorker to make his regular commute to the cathedral and library to feed the pigeons. While crossing a street a couple of blocks from the hotel, Tesla was struck by a moving taxicab and was thrown to the ground. His back was severely wrenched and three of his ribs were broken in the accident. The full extent of his injuries was never known; Tesla refused to consult a doctor, an almost lifelong custom, and never fully recovered.[232][233]
On 7 January 1943, at the age of 86, Tesla died alone in Room 3327 of the Hotel New Yorker. His body was found by maid Alice Monaghan when she entered Tesla's room, ignoring the "do not disturb" sign that Tesla had placed on his door two days earlier. Assistant medical examiner H.W. Wembley examined the body and ruled that the cause of death had been coronary thrombosis (a type of heart attack).
Two days later the Federal Bureau of Investigation ordered the Alien Property Custodian to seize Tesla's belongings. John G. Trump, a professor at M.I.T. and a well-known electrical engineer serving as a technical aide to the National Defense Research Committee, was called in to analyze the Tesla items. After a three-day investigation, Trump's report concluded that there was nothing which would constitute a hazard in unfriendly hands, stating:
His [Tesla's] thoughts and efforts during at least the past 15 years were primarily of a speculative, philosophical, and somewhat promotional character often concerned with the production and wireless transmission of power; but did not include new, sound, workable principles or methods for realizing such results.[234]
In a box purported to contain a part of Tesla's "death ray", Trump found a 45-year-old multidecade resistance box.[235]
On 10 January 1943, New York City mayor Fiorello La Guardia read a eulogy written by Slovene-American author Louis Adamic live over WNYC radio while violin pieces "Ave Maria" and "Tamo daleko" were played in the background. On 12 January, two thousand people attended a state funeral for Tesla at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in Manhattan. After the funeral, Tesla's body was taken to the Ferncliff Cemetery in Ardsley, New York, where it was later cremated. The following day, a second service was conducted by prominent priests in the Trinity Chapel (today's Serbian Orthodox Cathedral of Saint Sava) in New York City.
Personal life and character
Photograph of Nikola Tesla, a slender, moustachioed man with a thin face and pointed chin.
Tesla c. 1896
Tesla was a lifelong bachelor, who had once explained that his chastity was very helpful to his scientific abilities.[236] In an interview with the Galveston Daily News on 10 August 1924 he stated, "Now the soft-voiced gentlewoman of my reverent worship has all but vanished. In her place has come the woman who thinks that her chief success in life lies in making herself as much as possible like man—in dress, voice and actions..."[211] Although he told a reporter in later years that he sometimes felt that by not marrying, he had made too great a sacrifice to his work,[209] Tesla chose to never pursue or engage in any known relationships, instead finding all the stimulation he needed in his work.
Tesla was asocial and prone to seclude himself with his work.[137][237][238] However, when he did engage in social life, many people spoke very positively and admiringly of Tesla. Robert Underwood Johnson described him as attaining a "distinguished sweetness, sincerity, modesty, refinement, generosity, and force".[239] His secretary, Dorothy Skerrit, wrote: "his genial smile and nobility of bearing always denoted the gentlemanly characteristics that were so ingrained in his soul".[240] Tesla's friend, Julian Hawthorne, wrote, "seldom did one meet a scientist or engineer who was also a poet, a philosopher, an appreciator of fine music, a linguist, and a connoisseur of food and drink".[241]
Tesla was a good friend of Francis Marion Crawford, Robert Underwood Johnson,[242] Stanford White,[243] Fritz Lowenstein, George Scherff, and Kenneth Swezey.[244][245][246] In middle age, Tesla became a close friend of Mark Twain; they spent a lot of time together in his lab and elsewhere.[242] Twain notably described Tesla's induction motor invention as "the most valuable patent since the telephone".[247] At a party thrown by actress Sarah Bernhardt in 1896, Tesla met Indian Hindu monk Swami Vivekananda. Vivekananda later wrote that Tesla said he could demonstrate mathematically the relationship between matter and energy, something Vivekananda hoped would give a scientific foundation to Vedantic cosmology.[248][249] The meeting with Swami Vivekananda stimulated Tesla's interest in Eastern Science, which led to Tesla studying Hindu and Vedic philosophy for a number of years.[250] Tesla later wrote an article titled "Man's Greatest Achievement" using Sanskrit terms akasha and prana to describe the relationship between matter and energy.[251][252] In the late 1920s, Tesla befriended George Sylvester Viereck, a poet, writer, mystic, and later, a Nazi propagandist. Tesla occasionally attended dinner parties held by Viereck and his wife.[253][254]
Tesla could be harsh at times and openly expressed disgust for overweight people, such as when he fired a secretary because of her weight.[255] He was quick to criticize clothing; on several occasions, Tesla directed a subordinate to go home and change her dress.[236] When Thomas Edison died, in 1931, Tesla contributed the only negative opinion to The New York Times, buried in an extensive coverage of Edison's life:
He had no hobby, cared for no sort of amusement of any kind and lived in utter disregard of the most elementary rules of hygiene ... His method was inefficient in the extreme, for an immense ground had to be covered to get anything at all unless blind chance intervened and, at first, I was almost a sorry witness of his doings, knowing that just a little theory and calculation would have saved him 90 percent of the labor. But he had a veritable contempt for book learning and mathematical knowledge, trusting himself entirely to his inventor's instinct and practical American sense.[256][257]
Tesla became a vegetarian in his later years, living on only milk, bread, honey, and vegetable juices.[223][258]
Views and beliefs
On experimental and theoretical physics
Tesla disagreed with the theory of atoms being composed of smaller subatomic particles, stating there was no such thing as an electron creating an electric charge. He believed that if electrons existed at all, they were some fourth state of matter or "sub-atom" that could exist only in an experimental vacuum and that they had nothing to do with electricity.[259][260] Tesla believed that atoms are immutable—they could not change state or be split in any way. He was a believer in the 19th-century concept of an all-pervasive ether that transmitted electrical energy.[261]
Tesla was generally antagonistic towards theories about the conversion of matter into energy.[262] He was also critical of Einstein's theory of relativity, saying:
I hold that space cannot be curved, for the simple reason that it can have no properties. It might as well be said that God has properties. He has not, but only attributes and these are of our own making. Of properties we can only speak when dealing with matter filling the space. To say that in the presence of large bodies space becomes curved is equivalent to stating that something can act upon nothing. I, for one, refuse to subscribe to such a view.[263]
In 1935 he described relativity as "a beggar wrapped in purple whom ignorant people take for a king" and said his own experiments had measured the speed of cosmic rays from Arcturus as fifty times the speed of light.[264]
Tesla claimed to have developed his own physical principle regarding matter and energy that he started working on in 1892,[262] and in 1937, at age 81, claimed in a letter to have completed a "dynamic theory of gravity" that "[would] put an end to idle speculations and false conceptions, as that of curved space". He stated that the theory was "worked out in all details" and that he hoped to soon give it to the world.[265] Further elucidation of his theory was never found in his writings.[266]
On society
Tesla c. 1885
Tesla is widely considered by his biographers to have been a humanist in philosophical outlook.[267][268] This did not preclude Tesla, like many of his era, from becoming a proponent of an imposed selective breeding version of eugenics.
Tesla expressed the belief that human "pity" had come to interfere with the natural "ruthless workings of nature". Though his argumentation did not depend on a concept of a "master race" or the inherent superiority of one person over another, he advocated for eugenics. In a 1937 interview he stated:
... man's new sense of pity began to interfere with the ruthless workings of nature. The only method compatible with our notions of civilization and the race is to prevent the breeding of the unfit by sterilization and the deliberate guidance of the mating instinct ... The trend of opinion among eugenists is that we must make marriage more difficult. Certainly no one who is not a desirable parent should be permitted to produce progeny. A century from now it will no more occur to a normal person to mate with a person eugenically unfit than to marry a habitual criminal.[269]
In 1926, Tesla commented on the ills of the social subservience of women and the struggle of women toward gender equality, and indicated that humanity's future would be run by "Queen Bees". He believed that women would become the dominant sex in the future.[270]
Tesla made predictions about the relevant issues of a post-World War I environment in a printed article entitled "Science and Discovery are the great Forces which will lead to the Consummation of the War" (20 December 1914).[271] Tesla believed that the League of Nations was not a remedy for the times and issues.[31][better source needed]
On religion
Tesla was raised an Orthodox Christian. Later in life he did not consider himself to be a "believer in the orthodox sense", said he opposed religious fanaticism, and said "Buddhism and Christianity are the greatest religions both in number of disciples and in importance."[272] He also said "To me, the universe is simply a great machine which never came into being and never will end" and "what we call 'soul' or 'spirit,' is nothing more than the sum of the functionings of the body. When this functioning ceases, the 'soul' or the 'spirit' ceases likewise."[272]
Literary works
Tesla wrote a number of books and articles for magazines and journals.[273] Among his books are My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, compiled and edited by Ben Johnston in 1983 from a series of 1919 magazine articles by Tesla which were republished in 1977; The Fantastic Inventions of Nikola Tesla (1993), compiled and edited by David Hatcher Childress; and The Tesla Papers.
Many of Tesla's writings are freely available online,[274] including the article "The Problem of Increasing Human Energy", published in The Century Magazine in 1900,[275] and the article "Experiments with Alternate Currents of High Potential and High Frequency", published in his book Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla.[276][277]
Legacy and honors
See also: Nikola Tesla in popular culture, List of things named after Nikola Tesla, and List of Nikola Tesla patents
Gilded urn with Tesla's ashes, in his favorite geometric object, a sphere (Nikola Tesla Museum, Belgrade)
In 1952, following pressure from Tesla's nephew, influential Yugoslav politician Sava Kosanović [sr], Tesla's entire estate was shipped to Belgrade in 80 trunks marked N.T. In 1957, Kosanović's secretary Charlotte Muzar transported Tesla's ashes from the United States to Belgrade. The ashes are displayed in a gold-plated sphere on a marble pedestal in the Nikola Tesla Museum.[278]
Tesla obtained around 300 patents worldwide for his inventions.[279] Some of Tesla's patents are not accounted for, and various sources have discovered some that have lain hidden in patent archives. There are a minimum of 278 known patents[279] issued to Tesla in 26 countries. Many of Tesla's patents were in the United States, Britain, and Canada, but many other patents were approved in countries around the globe.[280] Many inventions developed by Tesla were not put into patent protection.
See also
Atmospheric electricity – Electricity in planetary atmospheres
Michael Faraday – English scientist (1791–1867)
Charles Proteus Steinmetz – American mathematician and electrical engineer (1865–1923)
Telluric current – Natural electric current in the Earth's crust
Notes
Footnotes
Tesla does not mention which professor this was by name, but some sources conclude this was Martin Sekulić.[24][25]
Tesla's contemporaries remembered that on a previous occasion Machine Works manager Batchelor had been unwilling to give Tesla a $7 a week pay raise [56]
Account comes from a letter Tesla sent in 1938 on the occasion of receiving an award from the National Institute of Immigrant Welfare[64]
Citations
Jonnes 2004, p. 355.
"Tesla" Archived 24 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine. Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
Burgan 2009, p. 9.
"Electrical pioneer Tesla honoured". BBC News. 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 October 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2013.
Laplante, Phillip A. (1999). Comprehensive Dictionary of Electrical Engineering 1999. Springer. p. 635. ISBN 978-3-540-64835-2.
O'Shei, Tim (2008). Marconi and Tesla: Pioneers of Radio Communication. MyReportLinks.com Books. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-59845-076-7.
Van Riper 2011, p. 150
"Pictures of Tesla's home in Smiljan, Croatia and his father's church after rebuilding". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 2 June 2003. Retrieved 22 May 2013.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 143.
O'Neill 1944, pp. 9, 12.
Carlson 2013, p. 14.
Dommermuth-Costa 1994, p. 12, "Milutin, Nikola's father, was a well-educated priest of the Serbian Orthodox Church.".
Cheney 2011, p. 25, "The tiny house in which he was born stood next to the Serbian Orthodox Church presided over by his father, the Reverend Milutin Tesla, who sometimes wrote articles under the nom-de-plume 'Man of Justice'".
Carlson 2013, p. 14, "Following a reprimand at school for not keeping his brass buttons polished, he quit and instead chose to become a priest in the Serbian Orthodox Church".
Burgan 2009, p. 17, "Nikola's father, Milutin was a Serbian Orthodox priest and had been sent to Smiljan by his church.".
O'Neill 1944, p. 10.
Cheney 2001.
Seifer 2001, p. 7.
Carlson 2013, p. 21.
Seifer 2001, p. 13.
Tesla, Nikola; Marinčić, Aleksandar (2008). From Colorado Springs to Long Island: research notes. Belgrade: Nikola Tesla Museum. ISBN 978-86-81243-44-2.
Budiansky, Stephen (2021). Journey to the edge of reason : the life of Kurt Gödel (First ed.). New York, NY. ISBN 978-1-324-00545-2. In the natural sciences, Austria produced a remarkable number of talented theorists and experimentalists. The electrical genius Nikola Tesla, from Croatia, studied in Karlovac at one of the rigorous German-language high schools, the Gymnasiums, established throughout the Austrian Empire.
Wohinz 2019, pp. 14–15.
Seifer 1998, CHILDHOOD 1856-74.
Petešić 1976, pp. 29–30.
Carlson 2013, p. 32.
"Tesla Life and Legacy – Tesla's Early Years". PBS. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2012.
O'Neill 1944, p. 33.
Glenn, Jim, ed. (1994). The complete patents of Nikola Tesla. New York: Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 1-56619-266-8.
Carlson 2013, p. 29.
Tesla, Nikola (2011) [1919 edition reprint]. My inventions: the autobiography of Nikola Tesla. Eastford: Martino Fine Books. ISBN 978-1-61427-084-3.
Adelman, Juliana (11 February 2016). "The electricity between Mark Twain and Nikola Tesla". The Irish Times.
Seifer 2001, p. 14.
O'Neill 1944, p. 39.
Carlson 2013, pp. 35.
Seifer 2001, p. 17.
Seifer 2001, pp. 17–18.
Carlson 2013, pp. 47.
Mrkich, D. (2003). Nikola Tesla: The European Years (1st ed.). Ottawa: Commoner's Publishing. ISBN 0-88970-113-X.
"NYHOTEL". Tesla Society of NY. Archived from the original on 31 December 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2012.
"Nikola Tesla: The Genius Who Lit the World". Top Documentary Films. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2021.
Carlson 2013, pp. 63–64.
Carlson 2013, p. 70.
Carlson 2013, p. 69.
O'Neill 1944, pp. 57–60.
"Edison & Tesla – The Edison Papers". edison.rutgers.edu. Archived from the original on 11 March 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
Carey, Charles W. (1989). American inventors, entrepreneurs & business visionaries. Infobase Publishing. p. 337. ISBN 0-8160-4559-3. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 27 November 2010.
Carlson 2013, pp. 71–73.
Radmilo Ivanković' Dragan Petrović, review of the reprinted "Nikola Tesla: Notebook from the Edison Machine Works 1884–1885" Archived 26 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 86-81243-11-X, teslauniverse.com
Carlson 2013, pp. 72–73.
Seifer 2001, pp. 25, 34.
Carlson 2013, pp. 69–73.
"Nikola Tesla, My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, originally published: 1919, p. 19" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
O'Neill 1944, p. 64.
Pickover 1999, p. 14
Seifer – Wizard: The Life and Times of Nikola Tesla, p. 38
Jonnes 2004, pp. 109–110.
Seifer 2001, p. 38.
Carlson 2013, p. 73.
Jonnes 2004, pp. 110–111.
Seifer 1998, p. 41.
Jonnes 2004, p. 111.
Carlson 2013, p. 75.
John Ratzlaff, Tesla Said, Tesla Book Co., p. 280.
Charles Fletcher Peck of Englewood, New Jersey per [1] Archived 8 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Carlson 2013, p. 80.
Carlson 2013, pp. 76–78.
Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930. JHU Press. March 1993. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-8018-4614-4. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Thomas Parke Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930, pp. 115–118
Ltd, Nmsi Trading; Institution, Smithsonian (1998). Robert Bud, Instruments of Science: An Historical Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 204. ISBN 978-0-8153-1561-2. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
Jonnes 2004, p. 161.
Henry G. Prout, A Life of George Westinghouse, p. 129
Carlson 2013, p. 105-106.
Froehlich, Fritz E.; Kent, Allen (December 1998). The Froehlich/Kent Encyclopedia of Telecommunications: Volume 17. CRC Press. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-8247-2915-8. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
Jonnes 2004, p. 160–162.
Carlson 2013, pp. 108–111.
1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved 29 February 2024.
Klooster 2009, p. 305.
Harris, William (14 July 2008). "William Harris, How did Nikola Tesla change the way we use energy?". Science.howstuffworks.com. p. 3. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
Munson, Richard (2005). From Edison to Enron: The Business of Power and What It Means for the Future of Electricity. Westport, CT: Praeger. pp. 24–42. ISBN 978-0-275-98740-4.
Quentin R. Skrabec (2007). George Westinghouse: Gentle Genius, Algora Publishing, pp. 119–121
Robert L. Bradley, Jr. (2011). Edison to Enron: Energy Markets and Political Strategies, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 55–58
Quentin R. Skrabec (2007). George Westinghouse: Gentle Genius, Algora Publishing, pp. 118–120
Seifer 1998, p. 47.
Skrabec, Quentin R. (2007). George Westinghouse : gentle genius. New York: Algora Pub. ISBN 978-0-87586-506-5.
Carlson 2013, p. 130.
Carlson 2013, p. 131.
Jonnes 2004, p. 29.
Thomas Parke Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930 (1983), p. 119
Jonnes 2004, p. 228.
Carlson 2013, pp. 130–131.
Cheney 2001, pp. 48–49.
Christopher Cooper, The Truth About Tesla: The Myth of the Lone Genius in the History of Innovation, Race Point Publishing. 2015, p. 109
Electricity, a Popular Electrical Journal, Volume 13, No. 4, 4 August 1897, Electricity Newspaper Company, pp. 50 Google Books Archived 28 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine
Rybak, James P. (November 1999). "Nikola Tesla: Scientific Savant from the Tesla Universe Article Collection". Popular Electronics: 40–48 & 88. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2017.
Carlson, W. Bernard (2013). Tesla: Inventor of the Electrical Age, Princeton University Press, p. 218
"Laboratories in New York (1889–1902)". Open Tesla Research. Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 21 January 2017.
Carlson 2013, p. 120.
Carlson 2013, p. 122.
"Tesla coil". Museum of Electricity and Magnetism, Center for Learning. National High Magnetic Field Laboratory website, Florida State Univ. 2011. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2013.
Carlson 2013, p. 124.
Burnett, Richie (2008). "Operation of the Tesla Coil". Richie's Tesla Coil Web Page. Richard Burnett private website. Archived from the original on 20 July 2015. Retrieved 24 July 2015.
"Naturalization Record of Nikola Tesla, 30 July 1891". Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021., Naturalization Index, NYC Courts, referenced in Carlson (2013), Tesla: Inventor of the Electrical Age, p. H-41
Carlson 2013, p. 138.
Uth, Robert (12 December 2000). "Tesla coil". Tesla: Master of Lightning. PBS.org. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2008.
Tesla, Nikola (20 May 1891). Experiments with Alternate Currents of Very High Frequency and Their Application to Methods of Artificial Illumination. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2017., lecture delivered before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, Columbia College, New York. Reprinted as a book of the same name by. Wildside Press. 2006. ISBN 0-8095-0162-7. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2017.
Carlson 2013, p. 132.
Christopher Cooper (2015). The Truth About Tesla: The Myth of the Lone Genius in the History of Innovation, Race Point Publishing, pp. 143–144
Carlson 2013, pp. 178–179.
Orton, John (2004). The Story of Semiconductors. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 53.
Corum, Kenneth L. & Corum, James F. "Tesla's Connection to Columbia University" (PDF). Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
Carlson 2013, p. 166.
Carlson 2013, p. 167.
Moran, Richard (2007). Executioner's Current: Thomas Edison, George Westinghouse, and the Invention of the Electric Chair. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 222.
Rosenberg, Chaim M. (20 February 2008). America at the Fair: Chicago's 1893 World's Columbian Exposition. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7385-2521-1. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 3 November 2021.
Bertuca, David J.; Hartman, Donald K. & Neumeister, Susan M. (1996). The World's Columbian Exposition: A Centennial Bibliographic Guide. Bloomsbury Academic. pp. xxi. ISBN 978-0-313-26644-7. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
Hugo Gernsback, "Tesla's Egg of Columbus, How Tesla Performed the Feat of Columbus Without Cracking the Egg" Electrical Experimenter, 19 March 1919, p. 774 [2] Archived 27 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Seifer 2001, p. 120.
Thomas Commerford Martin, The Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla: With Special Reference to His Work in Polyphase Currents and High Potential Lighting, Electrical Engineer – 1894, Chapter XLII, page 485 [3]
Cheney 2001, p. 76.
Cheney 2001, p. 79.
Barrett, John Patrick (1894). Electricity at the Columbian Exposition; Including an Account of the Exhibits in the Electricity Building, the Power Plant in Machinery Hall. R. R. Donnelley. pp. 268–269. Retrieved 29 November 2010.
Carlson 2013, p. 182.
Carlson 2013, pp. 181–185.
Reciprocating Engine, U.S. patent 514,169, 6 February 1894.
Carlson 2013, pp. 167–173.
Carlson 2013, pp. 205–206.
Mr. Tesla's Great Loss, All of the Electrician’s Valuable Instruments Burned, WORK OF HALF A LIFETIME GONE, New York Times, 14 March 1895 (archived at teslauniverse.com Archived 28 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine)
Tesla, Nikola (2007). X-ray vision: Nikola Tesla on Roentgen rays (1st ed.). Radford, VA: Wiilder Publications. ISBN 978-1-934451-92-2.
Cheney 2001, p. 134.
RADIOGRAPHY – EXPERIMENTS MADE BY NIKOLA TESLA – Shoulder of a Man Taken Through His Clothing—Chalky Deposits Infallibly Detected, The Constitution, Atlanta, Georgia, Friday 13, March 1896, p. 9 online archive Archived 4 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine
Tesla, Nikola (17 November 1898). "High Frequency Oscillators for Electro-Therapeutic and Other Purposes". Proceedings of the American Electro-Therapeutic Association. American Electro-Therapeutic Association. p. 25. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 27 January 2009.
Griffiths, David J. Introduction to Electrodynamics, ISBN 0-13-805326-X and Jackson, John D. Classical Electrodynamics, ISBN 0-471-30932-X.
Transactions of the American Electro-therapeutic Association. American Electrotherapeutic Association. 1899. p. 16. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 25 November 2010.
Anderson, Leland (1998). Nikola Tesla's teleforce & telegeodynamics proposals. Breckenridge, Colo.: 21st Century Books. ISBN 0-9636012-8-8.
W. Bernard Carlson, Tesla: Inventor of the Electrical Age, Princeton University Press – 2013, p. 231.
Jonnes 2004.
Singer, P. W. (2009). Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the Twenty-first Century. Penguin. ISBN 978-1-4406-8597-2. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 10 September 2012 – via Google Books.
Fitzsimons, Bernard, ed. "Fritz-X", in The Illustrated Encyclopedia of 20th Century Weapons and Warfare (London: Phoebus, 1978), Volume 10, p.1037.
Carlson 2013, p. 127.
"Nikola Tesla: The Guy Who DIDN'T "Invent Radio"". earlyradiohistory.us. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2018.
Tesla's own experiments led him to erroneously believe Hertz had misidentified a form of conduction instead of a new form of electromagnetic radiation, an incorrect assumption that Tesla held for a couple of decades.(Carlson, pp-127-128)(White, Nikola Tesla: The Guy Who DIDN'T "Invent Radio")
Brian Regal, Radio: The Life Story of a Technology, p. 22
Carlson 2013, p. 209.
My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, Hart Brothers, 1982, Ch. 5, ISBN 0-910077-00-2, originally appeared in The Electrical Experimenter magazine in 1919
"Tesla on Electricity Without Wires," Electrical Engineer – N.Y., 8 January 1896, p. 52. (Refers to letter by Tesla in the New York Herald, 31 December 1895.)
Mining & Scientific Press, "Electrical Progress" Nikola Tesla Is Credited With Statement", 11 April 1896
Seifer 2001, p. 107.
Carlson 2013, p. 45.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 92.
"PBS: Tesla – Master of Lightning: Colorado Springs". pbs.org. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017.
Carlson 2013, p. 264.
Nikola Tesla On His Work With Alternating Currents and Their Application to Wireless Telegraphy, Telephony, and Transmission of Power, Leland I. Anderson, 21st Century Books, 2002, p. 109, ISBN 1-893817-01-6.
Carlson 2013, pp. 255–259.
Cheney 2001, p. 173.
Carlson 2013, pp. 290–301.
Gillispie, Charles Coulston, "Dictionary of Scientific Biography;" Tesla, Nikola. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York.
SECOR, H. WINFIELD (August 1917). "TESLA'S VIEWS ON ELECTRICITY AND THE WAR". The Electrical Experimenter. Archived from the original on 10 February 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2012.
Carlson 2013, p. 301.
Cooper 2015, p. 165.
Daniel Blair Stewart (1999). Tesla: The Modern Sorcerer, Frog Book. p. 372
Carlson 2013, p. 315.
Seifer 1998, pp. 220–223.
Seifer, Marc. "Nikola Tesla: The Lost Wizard". ExtraOrdinary Technology (Volume 4, Issue 1; Jan/Feb/March 2006). Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 14 July 2012.
"Research of Nikola Tesla in Long Island Laboratory". Archived from the original on 6 May 2016. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
"Tesla Wardenclyffe Project Update – An Introduction to the Issues". www.teslascience.org. 22 June 2023. Archived from the original on 21 January 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017.
Broad, William J (4 May 2009). "A Battle to Preserve a Visionary's Bold Failure". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2013.
Malanowski, Gregory, The Race for Wireless, AuthorHouse, p. 35
Childress, David Hatcher (1993). The Fantastic Inventions of Nikola Tesla. Adventures Unlimited. p. 255. ISBN 978-0-932813-19-0.
Tesla, Nikola (8 December 2017). Nikola Tesla on His Work with Alternating Currents and Their Application to Wireless Telegraphy, Telephony, and Transmission of Power: An Extended Interview. 21st Century Books. ISBN 978-1-893817-01-2. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 18 November 2020 – via Google Books.
Carlson 2013, pp. 373–375.
Carlson 2013, p. 371.
Seifer 2001, p. 398.
Carlson 2013, p. 373.
O'Neill 1944.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 115.
Carlson 2013, p. 377.
Seifer 2001, p. 373.
Howard B. Rockman, Intellectual Property Law for Engineers and Scientists, John Wiley & Sons – 2004, p. 198.
"Marconi Wireless Tel. Co. v. United States, 320 U.S. 1 (1943)". Justia Law. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017.
Carlson 2013, p. 377-378.
Redouté, Jean-Michel; Steyaert, Michiel (10 October 2009). Jean-Michel Redouté, Michiel Steyaert, EMC of Analog Integrated Circuits. Springer. p. 3. ISBN 978-90-481-3230-0. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
Sobot, Robert (18 February 2012). Robert Sobot, Wireless Communication Electronics:Introduction to RF Circuits and Design Techniques. Springer. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-4614-1116-1. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
Cheney 2001, p. 245.
"The Nobel Prize in Physics 1915". nobelprize.org. Archived from the original on 8 August 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2012.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 120
Seifer 2001, pp. 378–380.
Goldman, Phyllis (1997). Monkeyshines on Great Inventors. Greensboro, NC: EBSCO Publishing, Inc. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-888325-04-1. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 14 May 2020.
Acović, Dragomir (2012). Slava i čast: Odlikovanja među Srbima, Srbi među odlikovanjima. Belgrade: Službeni Glasnik. p. 85.
"APS Member History". American Philosophical Society. Archived from the original on 11 March 2024. Retrieved 11 March 2024.
"IEEE Edison Medal Recipient List" (PDF). Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2022.
"Culture". www.eserbia.org. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017.
Cheney 2011, p. 312.
Anand Kumar Sethi (2016). The European Edisons: Volta, Tesla, and Tigerstedt, Springer. pp. 53–54
Carlson 2013, p. 353.
Gilliams, E. Leslie (1912). "Tesla's Plan of Electrically Treating Schoolchildren". Popular Electricity Magazine. Archived from the original on 9 January 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2014 – via teslacollection.com.
Margaret Cheney, Robert Uth, Jim Glenn, Tesla, Master of Lightning, pp. 128–129
Coe, Lewis (8 February 2006). Lewis Coe (2006). Wireless Radio: A History. McFarland. p. 154. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-2662-1.
Cheney 2001, p. 266.
Tesla, Nikola. "TESLA PATENT 1,655,114 APPARATUS FOR AERIAL TRANSPORTATION". U.S. Patent Office. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 20 July 2012.
Cheney 2001, p. 251.
""Nikola Tesla's Curious Contrivance" by A.J.S. RAYL Air & Space magazine, September 2006, reprint at History of Flight". airspacemag.com. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
Valentine Korah, An Introductory Guide to EC Competition Law and Practice, Sweet & Maxwell – 1928, page 235
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 125.
Carlson 2013, p. 467-468.
O'Neill 1944, p. 359.
"About Nikola Tesla". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
"Tesla Life and Legacy – Poet and Visionary". PBS. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
Seifer 2001, p. 414.
"About Nikola Tesla". Tesla Society of USA and Canada. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 135.
Jonnes 2004, p. 365.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, p. 149
Seifer 2001, p. 435
Carlson 2013, p. 379.
Kent, David J. (10 July 2012). "Happy Birthday, Nikola Tesla – A Scientific Rock Star is Born". Science Traveler. Archived from the original on 26 January 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2019.
"Time front cover, Vol XVIII, No. 3". 20 July 1931. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
"Nikola Tesla | 20 July 1931". Time. Archived from the original on 8 July 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2012.
Cheney 2001, p. 151.
Carlson 2013, pp. 380–382.
Tesla Predicts New Source of Power in Year, New York Herald Tribune, 9 July 1933
"Tesla's Ray". Time. 23 July 1934.
Seifer, Marc. "Tesla's "Death Ray" Machine". bibliotecapleyades.net. Archived from the original on 24 June 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
Cheney, Margaret & Uth, Robert (2001). Tesla: Master of Lightning. Barnes & Noble Books. p. 158
Coulon, Jessica (14 June 2023). "Did the U.S. Government Really Steal Nikola Tesla's Research Papers?". Popular Mechanics. Archived from the original on 26 June 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023.
Carlson 2013, p. 382.
Seifer 1998, p. 454.
"Aerial Defense 'Death-Beam' Offered to U.S. By Tesla" 12 July 1940
Seifer, Marc J. "Tesla's "death ray" machine". Archived from the original on 24 June 2006. Retrieved 5 September 2012.
Earl Sparling, NIKOLA TESLA, AT 79, USES EARTH TO TRANSMIT SIGNALS: EXPECTS TO HAVE $100,000,000 WITHIN TWO YEARS, New York World-Telegram, 11 July 1935
Carlson 2013, p. 380.
O'Neill 1944, p. 313.
Carlson 2013, p. 389.
"The Missing Papers". PBS. Archived from the original on 24 January 2001. Retrieved 5 July 2012.
Childress 1993, p. 249
Cheney 2001, p. 33.
Cheney, Uth & Glenn 1999, Preface.
McNichol, Tom (2011). AC/DC: The Savage Tale of the First Standards War. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 163–64. ISBN 978-1-118-04702-6. Tesla's peculiar nature made him a solitary man, a loner in a field that was becoming so complex that it demanded collaboration.
Seifer 2001, p. 130.
O'Neill 1944, p. 289.
Cheney 2001, p. 80.
"Famous Friends". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
"Stanford White". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
Swezey, Kenneth M., Papers 1891–1982, vol. 47, National Museum of American History, archived from the original on 5 May 2012, retrieved 4 July 2012
"Tribute to Nikola Tesla". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 13 June 2011. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
"Nikola Tesla at Wardenclyffe". Tesla Memorial Society of NY. Archived from the original on 29 November 2010. Retrieved 4 July 2012.
"Nikola Tesla: The patron saint of geeks?". News Magazine. BBC. 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012.
Kak, S. (2017) Tesla, wireless energy transmission and Vivekananda. Current Science, vol. 113, 2207–2210.
Paranjape, Makarand R. (12 June 2015). Swami Vivekananda: A Contemporary Reader edited by Makarand R. Paranjape. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-44636-1. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 4 May 2021.
"Nikola Tesla and Swami Vivekananda". www.teslasociety.com. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022.
"The Influence Vedic Philosophy Had on Nikola Tesla's Idea of Free Energy – SAND". The Influence Vedic Philosophy Had on Nikola Tesla’s Idea of Free Energy – SAND. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022.
"(PDF) Tesla (1930)-Man's Greatest Achievement.pdf". dokumen.tips. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022.
Cheney, Margaret & Uth, Robert (2001). Tesla: Master of Lightning. Barnes & Noble Books. p. 137.
Johnson, Neil M. George Sylvester Viereck: Poet and Propagandist. Neil M. Johnson.
Cheney 2001, p. 110.
Biographiq (2008). Thomas Edison: Life of an Electrifying Man. Filiquarian Publishing, LLC. p. 23. ISBN 978-1-59986-216-3.
"Tesla says Edison was an empiricist". New York Times. 19 October 1931. p. 27. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 15 January 2024.
Gitelman, Lisa (1 November 1997). "Reconciling the Visionary with the Inventor Wizard: The Life and Times of Nikola Tesla". technology review (MIT). Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 3 June 2012.
O'Neill 1944, p. 249.
"The Prophet of Science Looks Into The Future," Popular Science November 1928, p. 171. November 1928. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2013.
Seifer 2001, p. 1745
O'Neill 1944, p. 247.
New York Herald Tribune, 11 September 1932
"Tesla, 79, Promises to Transmit Force". Open Tesla Research. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022.
Prepared Statement by Nikola Tesla Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine downloadable from http://www.tesla.hu Archived 25 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine
Cheney 2001, p. 309.
Jonnes 2004, p. 154.
Belohlavek, Peter; Wagner, John W (2008). Innovation: The Lessons of Nikola Tesla. Blue Eagle. p. 43. ISBN 978-987-651-009-7. This was Tesla: a scientist, philosopher, humanist, and ethical man of the world in the truest sense.
"A Machine to End War". Public Broadcasting Service. February 1937. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2010.
Kennedy, John B., "When woman is boss Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine, An interview with Nikola Tesla." Colliers, 30 January 1926.
Tesla, Nikola. "Science and Discovery are the great Forces which will lead to the Consummation of the War". Rastko. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2012.
Tesla, Nikola (February 1937). George Sylvester Viereck (ed.). "A Machine to End War". PBS.org. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2012.
"Nikola Tesla Bibliography". 21st Century Books. Archived from the original on 27 September 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2011.
"Selected Tesla writings". Nikola Tesla Information Resource. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. Retrieved 15 March 2008.
"THE PROBLEM OF INCREASING HUMAN ENERGY". Twenty-First Century Books. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2011.
Tesla, Nikola. The Project Gutenberg eBook, Experiments with Alternate Currents of High Potential and High Frequency, by Nikola Tesla. Project Gutenberg. Archived from the original on 16 September 2011. Retrieved 21 April 2011.
Tesla, Nikola. "EXPERIMENTS WITH ALTERNATE CURRENTS OF HIGH POTENTIAL AND HIGH FREQUENCY". Twenty-First Century Books. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2011.
"Urn with Tesla's ashes". Tesla Museum. Archived from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2012.
Šarboh, Snežana (18–20 October 2006). "Nikola Tesla's Patents" (PDF). Sixth International Symposium Nikola Tesla. Belgrade, Serbia. p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2010.
Cheney 2001, p. 62.
References
Burgan, Michael (2009). Nikola Tesla: Inventor, Electrical Engineer. Mankato, Minnesota: Capstone. ISBN 978-0-7565-4086-9.
Carlson, W. Bernard (2013). Tesla: Inventor of the Electrical Age. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-4655-9. Archived from the original on 5 August 2023. Retrieved 2 June 2015.
Cheney, Margaret (2011). Tesla: Man Out of Time. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-7486-6. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Cheney, Margaret (2001) [1981]. Tesla: Man Out of Time. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-1536-7. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 14 May 2020.
Cheney, Margaret; Uth, Robert; Glenn, Jim (1999). Tesla, Master of Lightning. Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 978-0-7607-1005-0. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 21 June 2015.
Cooper, Christopher (2015). The truth about Tesla : the myth of the lone genius in the history of innovation. New York: Race Point Publishing. ISBN 978-1-63106-030-4.
Dommermuth-Costa, Carol (1994). Nikola Tesla: A Spark of Genius. Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 978-0-8225-4920-8. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Jonnes, Jill (2004). Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, and the Race to Electrify the World. Random House Trade Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0-375-75884-3. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Klooster, John W. (2009). Icons of Invention: The Makers of the Modern World from Gutenberg to Gates. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-34743-6. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
O'Neill, John J. (1944). Prodigal Genius: The Life of Nikola Tesla. New York: Ives Washburn. ISBN 0-914732-33-1. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2024. (see also Prodigal Genius: The Life of Nikola Tesla; also ISBN 1-59605-713-0; reprinted 2007 by Book Tree, ISBN 978-1-60206-743-1)
Pickover, Clifford A. (1999). Strange Brains and Genius: The Secret Lives Of Eccentric Scientists And Madmen. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-688-16894-0. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Petešić, Ćiril (1976). Genij s našeg kamenjara: život i djelo Nikole Tesle [The genius from our rocks: life and work of Nikola Tesla] (in Croatian). Zagreb: Školske novine. OCLC 36439558.
Seifer, Marc J. (2001). Wizard: the life and times of Nikola Tesla: biography of a genius. Citadel. ISBN 978-0-8065-1960-9. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 13 December 2015.
Seifer, Marc J. (1998). Wizard: The Life And Times Of Nikola Tesla. Citadel. ISBN 978-0-8065-3556-2. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 16 March 2016.
Van Riper, A. Bowdoin (2011). A Biographical Encyclopedia of Scientists and Inventors in American Film and TV since 1930. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-8128-0.
Wohinz, Josef W. (2019). "Nikola Tesla: Milestones in his life". In Schichler, Uwe; Wohinz, Josef W. (eds.). Nikola Tesla and the Graz Tech. Vol. 7 EN. Graz University of Technology/Library and Archive. doi:10.3217/978-3-85125-687-1. ISBN 978-3-85125-688-8.
Further reading
Library resources about
Nikola Tesla
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Nikola Tesla
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Books
Tesla, Nikola, My Inventions, Parts I through V published in the Electrical Experimenter monthly magazine from February through June 1919. Part VI published October 1919. Reprint edition with introductory notes by Ben Johnson, New York: Barnes and Noble, 1982; also online at Lucid Cafe Archived 2 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine, et cetera Archived 26 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine as My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla, 1919. ISBN 978-0-910077-00-2
Carlson, W. Bernard (2013). Tesla, Inventor of the Electrical Age. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-6910-5776-7
Glenn, Jim (1994). The Complete Patents of Nikola Tesla. ISBN 978-1-56619-266-8
Lomas, Robert (1999). The Man Who Invented the Twentieth Century: Nikola Tesla, forgotten genius of electricity. London: Headline. ISBN 978-0-7472-7588-6
Martin, Thomas C. (editor) (1894, 1996 reprint, copyright expired), The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla, includes some lectures, Montana: Kessinger. ISBN 978-1-56459-711-3
McNichol, Tom (2006). AC/DC The Savage Tale of the First Standards War, Jossey-Bass. ISBN 978-0-7879-8267-6
Peat, F. David (2002). In Search of Nikola Tesla (Revised ed.). Bath: Ashgrove. ISBN 978-1-85398-117-3.
Trinkaus, George (2002). Tesla: The Lost Inventions, High Voltage Press. ISBN 978-0-9709618-2-2
Valone, Thomas (2002). Harnessing the Wheelwork of Nature: Tesla's Science of Energy. ISBN 978-1-931882-04-0
Publications
A New System of Alternating Current Motors and Transformers, American Institute of Electrical Engineers, May 1888.
Selected Tesla Writings, Scientific papers and articles written by Tesla and others, spanning the years 1888–1940.
Light Without Heat Archived 16 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, The Manufacturer and Builder, January 1892, Vol. 24
Biography: Nikola Tesla Archived 9 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine, The Century Magazine, November 1893, Vol. 47
Tesla's Oscillator and Other Inventions Archived 9 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine, The Century Magazine, November 1894, Vol. 49
The New Telegraphy. Recent Experiments in Telegraphy with Sparks Archived 16 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, The Century Magazine, November 1897, Vol. 55
Journals
Pavićević, Aleksandra (2014). "From lighting to dust death, funeral and post mortem destiny of Nikola Tesla". Glasnik Etnografskog instituta SANU. 62 (2): 125–139. doi:10.2298/GEI1402125P. hdl:21.15107/rcub_dais_8218. ISSN 0350-0861.
Carlson, W. Bernard, "Inventor of dreams". Scientific American, March 2005 Vol. 292 Issue 3 p. 78(7).
Jatras, Stella L., "The genius of Nikola Tesla Archived 30 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine". The New American, 28 July 2003 Vol. 19 Issue 15 p. 9(1)
Lawren, B., "Rediscovering Tesla". Omni, March 1988, Vol. 10 Issue 6.
Rybak, James P., "Nikola Tesla: Scientific Savant". Popular Electronics, 1042170X, November 1999, Vol. 16, Issue 11.
Thibault, Ghislain, "The Automatization of Nikola Tesla: Thinking Invention in the Late Nineteenth Century". Configurations Archived 28 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Volume 21, Number 1, Winter 2013, pp. 27–52.
Martin, Thomas Commerford, "The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla", New York: The Electrical Engineer, 1894 (3rd Ed.); reprinted by Barnes & Noble, 1995
Anil K. Rajvanshi, "Nikola Tesla – The Creator of Electric Age", Resonance, March 2007.
Roguin, Ariel, "Historical Note: Nikola Tesla: The man behind the magnetic field unit". J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2004;19:369–374. 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Sellon, J. L., "The impact of Nikola Tesla on the cement industry". Behrent Eng. Co., Wheat Ridge, Colorado. Cement Industry Technical Conference. 1997. XXXIX Conference Record., 1997 IEEE/PC. Page(s) 125–133.
Valentinuzzi, M.E., "Nikola Tesla: why was he so much resisted and forgotten?" Inst. de Bioingenieria, Univ. Nacional de Tucuman; Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE. July/August 1998, 17:4, pp. 74–75.
Secor, H. Winfield, "Tesla's views on Electricity and the War", Electrical Experimenter, Volume 5, Number 4 August 1917.
Florey, Glen, "Tesla and the Military". Engineering 24, 5 December 2000.
Corum, K. L., J. F. Corum, Nikola Tesla, Lightning Observations, and Stationary Waves. 1994.
Corum, K. L., J. F. Corum, and A. H. Aidinejad, Atmospheric Fields, Tesla's Receivers and Regenerative Detectors. 1994.
Meyl, Konstantin, H. Weidner, E. Zentgraf, T. Senkel, T. Junker, and P. Winkels, Experiments to proof the evidence of scalar waves Tests with a Tesla reproduction. Institut für Gravitationsforschung (IGF), Am Heerbach 5, D-63857 Waldaschaff.
Anderson, L. I., "John Stone Stone on Nikola Tesla's Priority in Radio and Continuous Wave Radiofrequency Apparatus". The AWA Review, Vol. 1, 1986, pp. 18–41.
Anderson, L. I., "Priority in Invention of Radio, Tesla v. Marconi". Antique Wireless Association monograph, March 1980.
Marincic, A., and D. Budimir, "Tesla's contribution to radiowave propagation". Dept. of Electron. Eng., Belgrade Univ. (5th International Conference on Telecommunications in Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Service, 2001. TELSIKS 2001. pp. 327–331 vol.1)
Video
Nikola Tesla Archived 17 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine – 1977 ten-episode TV series featuring Rade Šerbedžija as Tesla.
Tajna Nikole Tesle (The Secret of Nikola Tesla) Archived 5 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine' – 1980 Documentary directed by Krsto Papić, featuring Petar Božović as Tesla and Orson Welles as J.P. Morgan
Tesla: Master of Lightning Archived 19 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine – 2003 Documentary by Robert Uth, featuring Stacy Keach as the voice of Tesla.
Tesla – a 2016 documentary film by David Grubin presented on the American Experience series.
Tesla – a 2020 biographical film by Michael Almereyda presented at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival.
External links
External videos
video icon Booknotes interview with Jill Jonnes on Empires of Light, 26 October 2003, C-SPAN
Nikola Tesla
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Listen to this article
(2 parts, 1 hour and 42 minutes)
Duration: 54 minutes and 2 seconds.54:02
Duration: 48 minutes and 18 seconds.48:18
Spoken Wikipedia icon
These audio files were created from a revision of this article dated 19 June 2021, and do not reflect subsequent edits.
(Audio help · More spoken articles)
Nikola Tesla Museum
Tesla memorial society by his grand-nephew William H. Terbo
Tesla – References in European newspapers
Online archive of many of Tesla's writings, articles and published papers
FBI. "Nikola Tesla" (PDF). Main Investigative File. FBI.
Tesla Science Center at Wardenclyffe
Works by Nikola Tesla at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Nikola Tesla at the Internet Archive
Works by Nikola Tesla at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Thomas H. White – Nikola Tesla: The Guy Who DIDN'T "Invent Radio"
Debunking the Tesla Myth (opinion piece)
- "Tesla's pigeon" - Amanda Gefter
Portals:
icon Electronics
icon Energy
icon Engineering
icon Physics
icon Technology
flag United States
flag Serbia
Biography
vte
Nikola Tesla
vte
Telecommunications
vte
IEEE Edison Medal
vte
Scientists whose names are used as units
vte
National symbols of Serbia
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Nikola Tesla1856 births1943 deaths19th-century American engineers19th-century Serbian engineers20th-century American engineers20th-century Serbian engineersAmerican electrical engineersAmerican eugenicistsAmerican futurologistsAmerican humanistsAmerican inventorsAmerican mechanical engineersDeaths from coronary thrombosisEmigrants from Austria-Hungary to the United StatesEngineers from Austria-HungaryInventors from Austria-HungaryFellows of the IEEEFellows of the American Association for the Advancement of ScienceGrand Crosses of the Order of St. SavaGrand Crosses of the Order of the White LionGraz University of Technology alumniGreat Officers of the Order of St. SavaHabsburg SerbsIEEE Edison Medal recipientsMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyMembers of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and ArtsMembers of The Lambs ClubMental calculatorsNaturalized citizens of the United StatesPeople associated with electricityPeople from Colorado Springs, ColoradoPeople from GospićPeople from KarlovacPeople from ManhattanPeople of the Military FrontierRadio pioneersRecipients of the Order of the Yugoslav CrownSerbian Austro-HungariansSerbian engineersSerbian inventorsSerbs of CroatiaWireless energy transfer
This page was last edited on 2 September 2024, at 19:15 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 4.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
